ii
2018 Edition

Phone Numbers

Bereavement Counseling..................................................1-202-461-6530
Civilian Health and Medical Program (CHAMPVA)...........1-800-733-8387
Caregiver Support ........................................................... 1-855-260-3274
Debt Management Center………………………….......…..1-800-827-0648
Education..........................................................................1-888-442-4551
Foreign Medical Program…………….......................…….1-888-820-1756
Headstones and Markers.................................................1-800-697-6947
Health Care......................................................................1-877-222-8387
Homeless Veterans..........................................................1-877-424-3838
Home Loans.....................................................................1-888-827-3702
Life Insurance...................................................................1-800-669-8477
National Cemetery Scheduling Office...............................1-800-535-1117
Pension Management Center...........................................1-877-294-6380
Presidential Memorial Certificate Program.......................1-202-565-4964
Telecommunication Device for the Deaf (TDD)................1-800-829-4833
VA Benefits.......................................................................1-800-827-1000
VA Combat Call Center ……………………………....…….1-877-927-8387
Veterans Crisis Line..........................................................1-800-273-8255
Women Veterans..............................................................1-877-222-8387

Web Sites

Burial and Memorial Benefits .........................................www.cem.va.gov
Caregiver Support ........................................... www.caregiver.va.gov
CHAMPVA............www.va.gov/hac/forbeneficiaries/forbeneficiaries.asp
eBenefits……....................................................www.ebenefits.va.gov
Education Benefits..........................................................www.gibill.va.gov
Environmental Exposures.….......…..www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures
Federal Recovery Coordination Program ............... www.va.gov/icbc/frcp
Health Care Eligibility........................................www.va.gov/healthbenefits
Homeless Veterans……….....…………………….. www.va.gov/homeless
Home Loan Guaranty...........................................www.homeloans.va.gov
Life Insurance.........................................................www.insurance.va.gov
Memorial Certificate .Program..........................www.cem.va.gov/pmc.asp
Mental Health....................................................www.mentalhealth.va.gov
My HealtheVet…………….......................................www.myhealth.va.gov
National Resource Directory ..............................................www.nrd.gov
Records..........................www.archives.gov/st-louis/military-personnel
Returning
Servicemembers.....................................www.oefoif.va.gov
State Departments of Veterans Affairs……www.va.gov/statedva.htm
Women Veterans.............................................www.womenshealth.va.gov
VA Vet Centers……….........................………..……www.vetcenter.va.gov
VA Home Page.......................................................................www.va.gov
VA Benefit Payment Rates..........................www.vba.va.gov/bln/21/rates
VA Forms....................................................................www.va.gov/vaform
Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment.............www.vetsuccess.gov

ii

Introduction

Veterans of the United States armed forces may be eligible for a broad

range of benefits and services provided by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). These benefits are codified in Title 38 of the United States
Code. This booklet contains a brief overview of the most commonly
sought information concerning Veterans benefits and services. For the
most accurate information, Veterans and family members should visit the
websites provided within this publication as regulations, payments, and
eligibility requirements are subject to change. For additional information, please visit www.va.gov. To find the nearest VA facility, go to https://
www.va.gov/landing2_locations.htm.
General Eligibility: Eligibility for most VA benefits is based upon discharge from active military service under other than dishonorable conditions. Active service means full-time service, other than active duty for
training, as a member of the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Coast
Guard, or as a commissioned officer of the Public Health Service, Environmental Science Services Administration or National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or its predecessor, the Coast and Geodetic Survey.
Eligible Wartime Periods: Certain VA Benefits Require Wartime Service.
For information on eligible wartime periods please visit http://www.benefits.va.gov/pension/wartimeperiod.asp. Dishonorable and bad conduct
discharges issued by general courts-martial may bar VA benefits. Veterans
in prison must contact VA to determine eligibility. VA benefits will not be
provided to any Veteran or dependent wanted for an outstanding felony
warrant.
Important Documents: In order to expedite benefits delivery, Veterans
seeking a VA benefit for the first time must submit a copy of their service
discharge form (DD-214, DD-215, or for World War II Veterans, a WD form),
which documents service dates and type of discharge, or provides full
name, military service number, and branch and dates of service. The Veteran’s service discharge form should be kept in a safe location accessible
to the Veteran and next of kin or designated representative.
The following documents will be needed for claims processing related to
a Veteran’s death: Veteran’s marriage certificate for claims of a surviving
spouse or children; Veteran’s death certificate if the Veteran did not die in
a VA health care facility; children’s birth certificates or adoption papers to
determine children’s benefits; or Veteran’s birth certificate to determine
parents’ benefits. For information and updates on VA benefits and services, follow us on Facebook at http://www.facebook.com/VeteransBenefits
and/or Twitter at http://twitter.com/VAVetBenefits.
iii

eBenefits

eBenefits is a joint VA/Department of Defense (DoD) Web portal that
provides resources and self-service capabilities to service members, Veterans, and their families to apply, research, access, and manage their VA
and military benefits and personal information through a secure Internet
connection.
Through eBenefits Veterans can: apply for benefits, view their disability
compensation claim status, access official military personnel documents
(e.g., DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty),
transfer entitlement of Post-9/11 GI Bill to eligible dependents (service
members only), obtain a VA-guaranteed home loan Certificate of Eligibility, and register for and update direct deposit information for certain
benefits. New features are added regularly.
Accessing eBenefits: The portal is located at www.ebenefits.va.gov. Service members or Veterans must register for an eBenefits account at one
of two levels: Basic or Premium. A Premium account allows the user to
access personal data in VA and DoD systems, as well as apply for benefits
online, check the status of claims, update address records, and more. The
Basic account allows access to information entered into eBenefits by the
service member or Veteran only. Basic accounts cannot access VA or DoD
systems.
Reporting Fraud: Help VA’s Secretary ensure integrity by reporting suspected fraud, waste or abuse in VA programs or operations.
Report Fraud to:
VA Inspector General Hotline
810 Vermont Ave., NW Washington, D.C. 20420
E-mail: vaoighotline@va.gov
VAOIG hotline 1-800-488-8244
Fax: (202) 495-5861

Contents
Health Care
Benefits
Burial and Memrorial Benefits
i

1
13
62

Health Care
More information on VA health care is available at the following resources: www.
va.gov/health, www.va.gov/healthbenefits and VA Health Benefits toll-free 1-877222-VETS (8387) Monday through Friday between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. EST

Basic Eligibility: A person who served in the active military, naval, or air
service and who was discharged or released under conditions other than
dishonorable may qualify for VA health care benefits including qualifying
Reserve and National Guard members.
Minimum Duty Requirements: Veterans who enlisted after Sept. 7,
1980, or who entered active duty after Oct. 16, 1981, must have served
24-continuous months or the full period for which they were called to
active duty in order to be eligible. This minimum duty requirement may
not apply to Veterans discharged for hardship, early out or a disability
incurred or aggravated in the line of duty.
Enrollment: Veterans can complete applications for enrollment in VA
health care by using one of the options below:
• To apply by phone, call 1-877-222-VETS (8387) Monday through
Friday between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. EST. VA staff members will collect the needed information and process the enrollment application for an enrollment determination.
•

When applying online at Vets.gov, Veterans fill out the application and electronically submit it to VA for processing. VA will
search for your supporting documentation through its electronic
information systems and will contact you if it is unable to verify
your military service.

•

The application form can also be downloaded from www.vets.
gov/healthcare/apply/ . Mail the completed form to: Health Eligibility Center ATTN: Enrollment Eligibility Division 2957 Clairmont
Road Suite 200 Atlanta, GA 30329-1647

•

Apply in person at any VA health care facility or VA regional office. Once enrolled, Veterans can receive health care at VA health
care facilities anywhere in the country.

The following four categories of Veterans are not required to enroll, but
are urged to do so to permit better planning of health resources:
1

1. Veterans with a service-connected disability rated at 50 percent or
more.
2. Veterans seeking care for a disability the military determined was
incurred or aggravated in the line of duty, but which VA has not yet rated,
within 12 months of discharge.
3. Veterans seeking care for a service-connected disability only.
4. Veterans seeking registry examinations (ionizing radiation, Agent
Orange, Gulf War/Operation Enduring Freedom/ Operation Iraqi Freedom/ Operation New Dawn (OEF/OIF/OND) depleted uranium, airborne
hazards and Airborne Hazards and Open Burn Pit Registry).
Priority Groups: During enrollment, each Veteran is assigned to a priority
group. VA uses priority groups to balance demand for VA health care enrollment with resources. Changes in available resources may reduce the
number of priority groups VA can enroll. If this occurs, VA will publicize
the changes and notify affected enrollees. A description of priority groups
follows:
Group 1: Veterans with service-connected disabilities rated 50
percent or more; Veterans determined by VA to be unemployable due to
service-connected conditions; and Veterans who have been awarded the
Medal of Honor.
Group 2: Veterans with service-connected disabilities rated 30 or 40
percent.
Group 3: Veterans who are former Prisoners of War; Veterans awarded the Purple Heart medal; Veterans whose discharge was for a disability
incurred or aggravated in the line of duty; Veterans with VA service-connected disabilities rated 10 or 20 percent; and, Veterans awarded special
eligibility classification under Title 38, U.S.C., § 1151, “benefits for individuals disabled by treatment or vocational rehabilitation.”
Group 4: Veterans who receive increased compensation or pension
based on their need for regular aid and attendance or by reason of being
permanently housebound; and, Veterans determined by VA to be catastrophically disabled.
Group 5: Nonservice-connected Veterans and non-compensable
service-connected Veterans rated by VA as 0-percent disabled and who
have an annual income below the VA’s geographically-adjusted income
limit (based on your resident ZIP code); Veterans receiving VA Pension
benefits; and Veterans eligible for Medicaid benefits
Group 6: Compensable 0 percent service-connected Veterans; Vet2

erans exposed to ionizing radiation during atmospheric testing or during
the occupation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Project 112/SHAD participants; Veterans who served in the Republic of Vietnam between Jan. 9,
1962 and May 7, 1975; Veterans who served in the Southwest Asia theater
of operations from Aug. 2, 1990, through Nov. 11, 1998; Veterans who
served in a theater of combat operations after Nov. 11, 1998, as follows:
Veterans discharged from active duty on or after Jan. 28, 2003, for five
years post discharge; and Veterans who served on active duty at Camp
Lejeune for at least 30 days between Aug.1, 1953, and Dec. 31, 1987.
Currently enrolled Veterans and new enrollees who served in a theater of
combat operations after Nov.11, 1998 and those who were discharged
from active duty on or after Jan. 28, 2003, are eligible for the enhanced
benefits for five years post discharge
Note: At the end of this enhanced enrolment priority group
placement time period, Veterans will be assigned to the highest
priority group their eligibility for which their status at that time
qualifies.
Group 7: Veterans with gross household income below the geographically-adjusted VA income limit for their resident location and, who
agree to pay copayments.
Group 8: Veterans with gross household incomes above VA national
income limit and the geographically-adjusted income limit for their
resident location and, who agree to pay copayments. Veterans eligible for
enrollment: Noncompensable 0-percent service-connected and are:
Subpriority a: Enrolled as of Jan. 16, 2003, and who have remained
enrolled since that date and/or placed in this subpriority due to changed
eligibility status.
Subpriority b: Enrolled on or after June 15, 2009, whose income
exceeds the current VA national income limits or VA national geographic
income limits by 10 percent or less Veterans eligible for enrollment:
nonservice-connected and:
Subpriority c: Enrolled as of Jan. 16, 2003, and who remained enrolled since that date and/ or placed in this subpriority due to changed
eligibility status
Subpriority d: Enrolled on or after June 15, 2009 whose income
exceeds the current VA national income limits or VA national geographic
income limits by 10 percent or less
Veterans NOT eligible for enrollment: Veterans not meeting the criteria
above:
Subpriority e: Noncompensable 0-percent service-connected (eligible for care of their service-connected condition only).
Subpriority f: Nonservice-connected
3

VA’s income limit change annually and current levels can be located at:
http://nationalincomelimits.vaftl.us/ .
Veterans Choice Program: As directed by the Veterans Access, Choice
and Accountability Act of 2014, VA implemented the Veterans Choice Program, which allows certain eligible Veterans to elect to receive care from
community health care providers closer to home rather than wait for a VA
appointment or travel a long distance to a VA facility. The Veterans Choice
Program temporarily authorizes enrolled Veterans to receive health care
from community providers. Any of the following conditions must apply:
• Veteran told by his or her local VA medical facility that they will
not be able to schedule an appointment for care within 30 days
of the date the Veteran’s physician determines he/she needs to
be seen or within 30 days of the date the Veteran wishes to be
seen, if there is no specific date from his or her physician;
•

Veteran lives more than 40 miles driving distance from the closest VA medical facility with a full- time primary care physician;

•

Veteran needs to travel by air, boat or ferry to the VA medical
facility closest to his/her home;

•

Veteran faces an unusual or excessive burden in traveling to the
closest VA medical facility based on geographic challenges, environmental factors, a medical condition, the nature or simplicity
or frequency of the care needed and whether an attendant is
needed. Staff at the Veteran’s local VA medical facility will work
with him/her to determine if the Veteran is eligible for any of
these reasons; or

•

Veteran lives in a state or territory without a full-service VA
medical facility. These locations include Alaska, Hawaii, New
Hampshire (excluding New Hampshire Veterans who live within
20 miles of the White River Junction VAMC) and the United States
territories (excluding Puerto Rico, which has a full service VA
medical facility).

Community care is only covered by VA for medical needs that have been
approved by a VA physician. Veterans who choose to use their Choice
Card should coordinate pre-approved care by calling 1-866-606-8198. For
more information, visit www.va.gov/opa/choiceact/.
Meeting the Unique Needs of Women Veterans: VA staff delivers the
4

highest quality health care in a setting that ensures privacy, dignity, and
sensitivity. Local VA facilities offer a variety of services, including women’s
gender-specific health, screening and disease prevention and routine
gynecologic services.
Women Veterans are potentially eligible to receive care provided in the
community when authorized by VA; however, the decision to use such
care is left to the facility providing care. By law, purchased care can only
be provided when the treating facility cannot provide the care required
or because of geographical inaccessibility.
Contact a local VA facility’s Women Veterans Program Manager for more
information on available services, call 1-855-VA-WOMEN (1-855-829-6636)
or visit www.womenshealth.va.gov/.
Lesbian Gay Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) Veterans: LGBT Veterans are eligible for the same VA benefits as any other Veteran and will be
treated in a welcoming environment. Transgender Veterans will be treated based upon their self-identified gender, including room assignments
in residential and inpatient settings. Same-sex couples: VA launched a
website to inform Veterans and beneficiaries of the recent changes in the
law and procedures involving same-sex marriages. Veterans can learn
more about VA’s guidance regarding same-sex marriages at www.va.gov/
opa/marriage.
Military Sexual Trauma (MST) is the term that VA uses to refer to sexual
assault or repeated, threatening sexual harassment occurring during
a Veteran’s military service. VA has expanded eligibility for Veterans in
need of mental health care due to sexual assault or sexual harassment to
Reservists and National Guard members participating in weekend drill. To
receive free treatment related to MST, Veterans do not need a VA serviceconnected disability. Veterans do not need to have reported the incident
when it happened or have other documentation that it occurred. There
are no length-of-service requirements to receive care, and some Veterans
may be able to receive free MST-related care even if they are not eligible
for other VA care. Veterans can learn more about VA’s MST-related services
online at www.mentalhealth.va.gov/msthome.asp .
OEF/OIF/OND Care Management: Each VA medical center has an Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation New Dawn
(OEF/OIF/OND) Care Management team in place to coordinate patient
care activities and ensure that Veterans are receiving patient-centered,
5

integrated care and benefits. Veterans who served in a theater of operations after Nov. 11, 1998, are eligible for an extended period of eligibility
for health care for five years after their discharge. In the case of multiple
call-ups, the five-year enrollment period begins on the most recent discharge date. This special eligibility includes cost-free health care services
and nursing home care for conditions possibly related to military service
and enrollment in Priority Group 6 or higher for five years from their
date of discharge or release from active duty, unless they are eligible for
enrollment in a higher priority group. More information for connecting
with OEF/OIF/OND Care Management teams can be found at www.oefoif.
va.gov
Tax Credit Veterans who are enrolled with VA for their health care meet
the standard for minimum health care coverage; therefore, they are not
eligible for assistance to lower their cost of health insurance premiums
if they chose to purchase additional health insurance outside of their VA
health care coverage. Remember, Veterans cannot receive a tax credit for
themselves when enrolling within the marketplace, if they are currently
enrolled with VA for their health care. For the latest information about
VA and the health care law, visit www.va.gov/health/aca/FAQ.asp or call
1-877-222-VETS (8387).
Financial Assessment: Most Veterans not receiving VA disability compensation or pension payments must provide a financial assessment
upon initial application to determine their eligibility for free medical care,
medications and/or travel benefits. This financial information also may be
used to determine the Veteran’s enrollment priority group.
For more information, visit www.va.gov/healthbenefits/cost/financial_assessment.asp , call toll-free 1-877-222-VETS (8387) Monday through Friday between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. EST or contact the enrollment coordinator
at your local VA medical facility. VA’s income limits are located at nationalincomelimits.vaftl.us/.
VA no longer requires enrolled non-service connected and 0-percent
non-compensable service connected Veterans to provide their financial
information annually. An assessment will continue to be collected from
Veterans at the time of application for enrollment. In lieu of the annual
financial reporting, VA will confirm the Veteran’s financial information
using information obtained from the Internal Revenue Service and Social
Security Administration.
6

Medical Services and Medication Copayments: While many Veterans
qualify for free health care based on a VA compensable service-connected condition or other special eligibilities, most Veterans are required to
complete a financial assessment at the time of enrollment to determine if
they qualify for free health care services. Veterans whose income exceeds
the VA income limits as well as those who choose not to complete the
financial assessment at the time of enrollment must agree to pay required
copayments for care to become eligible for VA healthcare services. For
more information on medical services and copays, visit https://www.
va.gov/HEALTHBENEFITS/cost/copays.asp
Private Health Insurance Billing: Veterans with private health insurance
may choose to use these sources of coverage as a supplement to their VA
benefits. Veterans are not responsible for paying any remaining balance
of VA’s insurance claim not paid or covered by their health insurance.
By law, VA is obligated to bill health insurance carriers for services
provided to treat a Veteran’s nonservice- connected conditions. Veterans
are asked to disclose all relevant health insurance information to ensure
current insurance information is on file, including coverage through a
spouse.
Any payment received by VA may be used to offset “dollar for dollar”
a Veteran’s VA copay responsibility. Funds that VA receives from third
party health insurance carriers go directly back to VA medical center’s
operational budget. That money can be used to hire more staff or buy
medical equipment to improve Veterans healthcare. Enrolled Veterans
can provide or update their insurance information by:
1. Using the online Health Benefits Renewal form (10-10-EZR) at www.
vets.gov/healthcare/apply/
2. Calling 1-877-222-VETS (8387) Monday through Friday between 8 a.m.
and 8 p.m. EST
3. Presenting their health insurance card to the clinic clerk or using the
self-service Kiosks available at their local VA health care facility. VA health
care is NOT considered a health insurance plan.
Reimbursement of Travel Costs: Eligible Veterans and non-Veterans
may be provided mileage reimbursement or, when medically indicated,
special mode transport (e.g., wheelchair van, ambulance), when travel is
in relation to VA medical care. Mileage reimbursement is 41.5 cents per
mile and is subject to a deductible of $3 for each one-way trip and $6 for
a round trip; with a maximum deductible of $18 or the amount after six
one-way trips (whichever occurs first) per calendar month. The deduct7

ible may be waived when travel is; in relation to a VA compensation or
pension examination; by a special mode of transportation; by an eligible
non-Veteran; or will cause a severe financial hardship, as defined by current regulatory guidelines.
Eligibility: A Veteran may be eligible for beneficiary travel services if the
following criteria are met:
• have a service-connected (SC) rating of 30 percent or more, or
• are traveling for treatment of a SC condition, or
• receive a VA pension, or your income does not exceed the maximum annual VA pension rate, or
• are traveling for a scheduled compensation or pension, or if not
otherwise eligible as noted above and;
• have a vision impairment, spinal cord injury or disorder, or a
double or multiple amputation who’s travel
in connection with care provided through a VA special disabilities rehabilitation program (including
programs provided by spinal cord injury centers, blind rehabilitation centers and prosthetics rehabilitation centers) if such care is provided on an in-patient basis or during a period in which you are provided
with temporary lodging at a facility of the Department to make such care
more accessible.
Veterans may qualify for special mode transportation (ambulance,
wheelchair van etc.) if they meet one of the eligibility criteria in the list
above, and have a medical condition requiring an ambulance or a specially equipped van as determined by a VA clinician, and the travel is preauthorized (authorization is not required for emergencies if a delay would
be hazardous to life or health). More information on Beneficiary Travel is
available at: www.va.gov/healthbenefits/vtp/beneficiary_travel.asp .
Veteran Health Registries: Certain Veterans can participate in a VA
health registry and receive free evaluations. VA maintains health registries
to provide special health evaluations and health-related information. To
participate, contact the environmental health coordinator at the nearest
VA health care facility or visit www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures to see
a directory which lists environmental health coordinators by state and
U.S. territory. Veterans should be aware that a health registry evaluation
is not a disability compensation exam. A registry evaluation does not
start a claim for compensation and is not required for any VA benefits. No
in-person medical evaluation is required to become registered. Veterans
not already enrolled in VA health care should contact an environmental
8

health coordinator at a nearby VA facility by visiting the following link: (
http://www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/coordinators.asp ) or calling
1-877-222-8387. To learn more and for a list of current health registries,
visit: www.publichealth.va.gov/exposures/benefits/registry-evaluation.
asp .
Vet Center Readjustment Counseling Services: VA provides free
readjustment counseling services to Veterans who served in a theater of
operations (combat zone) through community-based counseling centers,
called Vet Centers. Services also are available for their family members
regarding military-related issues. Vet Center counselors provide individual, group, marriage, and family readjustment counseling through direct
counseling, outreach, and referral, in 300 community-based Vet Centers
located in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and
American Samoa. . Vet Center staffs are available during normal business
hours at toll-free 1-800-905-4675 EST and 1-866-496-8838 PST. For more
information, visit www.vetcenter.va.gov.
Home Improvements and Structural Alterations: VA provides up to
$6,800 lifetime benefits for service-connected Veterans/ and up to $2,000
lifetime benefits for nonservice-connected Veterans to make home
improvements and/or structural changes necessary for the continuation
of treatment or for disability access to the Veterans/ home and essential
lavatory and sanitary facilities. For application information, contact the
prosthetic representative at the nearest VA medical center.
Special Eligibility Programs: VA provides comprehensive health care
benefits, including outpatient, inpatient, pharmacy, prosthetics, medical
equipment, and supplies for certain Korea and Vietnam Veterans’ birth
children diagnosed with spina bifida (except spina bifida occulta).
Services for Blind and Visually Impaired Veterans: Severely disabled
blind Veterans may be eligible for case management services at a VA
medical center and for admission to an inpatient or outpatient VA blind or
vision rehabilitation program.
Mental Health Care Treatment: Veterans eligible for VA medical care
may receive general and specialty mental health treatment as needed.
Mental health services are available in primary care clinics (including
Home Based Primary Care), general and specialty mental health outpatient clinics, inpatient mental health units, residential rehabilitation and
treatment programs, specialty medical clinics, and Community Living
9

Centers. For more information on VA mental health services, visit www.
va.gov/healthbenefits/access/mental_health_care.asp and www.mentalhealth.va.gov or contact your local VA health care facility’s Enrollment
Office.
Veterans Crisis Line: The Veterans Crisis Line is a toll-free, confidential
resource that connects Veterans in crisis and their families and friends
with qualified, caring VA responders. Veterans and their loved ones can
call 1-800-273-8255 and Press 1, chat online at www.vets.gov, or send a
text message to 838255 to receive confidential support 24-hours a day,
7-days a week, 365-days a year even if they are not registered with VA or
enrolled in VA health care. The professionals at the Veterans Crisis Line
are specially trained and experienced in helping Veterans of all ages and
circumstances — from Veterans coping with mental health issues that
were never addressed to Veterans struggling with relationships or the
transition back to civilian life. European access: Veterans and members of
the military community in Europe may dial 0800-1273-8255 or DSN 118.
For more information about VA’s suicide prevention program, visit: www.
Veteranscrisisline.net.
VA Dental Insurance Program: VA would like all Veterans to have access
to good oral health care; however, VA is limited to providing dental benefits to those Veterans who meet certain eligibility criteria. To help Veterans
who are not eligible for VA dental benefits or need more comprehensive
dental care, VA offers enrolled Veterans and beneficiaries of CHAMPVA the
opportunity to purchase dental insurance at a reduced cost through its
VA Dental Insurance Program (VADIP).
VADIP has been extended for an additional five years, until Dec. 31, 2021
by the VA Dental Insurance Reauthorization Act of 2016. Delta Dental of
California and MetLife will be offering private dental insurance plans for
enrolled Veterans and beneficiaries of CHAMPVA for VADIP. VADIP provides eligible individuals the opportunity to purchase discounted dental
insurance coverage, including diagnostic services, preventive services,
endodontic and other restorative services, surgical services and emergency services. Individuals who enroll in one of the dental insurance plans
will pay the entire premium in addition to the full cost of any copayments.
Enrollment is voluntary and does not affect eligibility for VA outpatient
dental services and treatment. The plans are available to eligible individuals in the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam,
the U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa and the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands. Individuals who were enrolled in VADIP during
10

the pilot period (Jan. 1, 2013 – Jan. 31, 2017) must re- enroll in one of the
new plans offered by Delta Dental or MetLife. While the insurance providers will remain the same, plan options, fees and other factors may have
changed from those offered during the pilot.
For more information about this program, call toll free 1-877-222-VETS
(8387) Monday through Friday between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. EST or visit
www.va.gov/healthbenefits/vadip . Veterans may also review each insurer
for specific information regarding their registration, rates and services:
Delta Dental at deltadentalins.com/vadip or call 1-855-370-3303; MetLife
at metlife.com/VADIP or call 1-888-310-1681.
Long-term Services: VA provides institution based services (nursing
home level of care) to Veterans through three national programs: VA
owned and operated Community Living Centers (CLC), State Veterans’
Homes owned and operated by the states, and the community nursing
home program. Each program has admission and eligibility criteria specific to the program. VA is obligated to pay the full cost of nursing home
services for enrolled Veterans who need nursing home care for a serviceconnected disability, or Veterans who have a 70 percent or greater
service-connected disability and Veterans with a rating of total disability
based on individual un-employability. VA-provided nursing home care for
all other Veterans is based on available resources. For more information
on Extended Care Services and Geriatrics, visit www.va.gov/healthbenefits/access/geriatrics.asp .
Emergency Medical Care in U.S. Community Facilities: A medical
emergency is generally defined as a condition of such a nature that a
sensible person would expect that a delay in seeking immediate medical attention would be hazardous to life or health. Eligible Veterans may
receive emergency care at a community health care facility, possibly at
VA expense, when a VA facility (or other Federal health care facility with
which VA has an agreement) cannot furnish efficient care due to the
distance from the facility, or when VA is unable to furnish the needed
emergency services. Since payment may be limited to the point when the
condition is stable enough for the Veteran to travel to a VA facility, a family member or friend must contact the closest VA medical facility as soon
as possible. The emergency is deemed to have ended when a VA provider
has determined that, based on sound medical judgment; the Veteran
could be transferred from the community facility to a VA medical center.
For more information on urgent care, visit https://www.va.gov/COMMUNITYCARE/programs/Veterans/Emergency_Care.asp
11

Foreign Medical Program: VA’s Foreign Medical Program (FMP) provides
health care payment/reimbursement for U.S. Veterans with VA-rated
service-connected conditions who live or travel abroad. Veterans calling
from within the Philippines may contact the VA Medical Services office at
1-800-1888-8782. If calling from outside of the Philippines, the number is
011-632-318-8387. Veterans may also register by email at IRIS.va.gov. All
other Veterans living or planning to travel outside the U.S. should register
with the Foreign Medical Program, P.O. Box 469061, Denver, CO 802469061, USA; telephone 303-331-7590. For information, visit: https://www.
va.gov/COMMUNITYCARE/programs/Veterans/fmp/index.asp
Caregiver Programs and Services: The Caregivers Benefit Program provides certain medical, travel, training and financial benefits to caregivers
of certain Veterans and who were seriously injured during their military
service on or after Sept.11, 2001. Eligible primary family caregivers can
receive a stipend, training, mental health services, travel and lodging reimbursement and access to health insurance if they are not already under
a health care plan. For more information, contact your local VA medical facility and speak with a caregiver support coordinator, visit www.caregiver.
va.gov or call toll-free at 1-855-260-3274.
Traveling Veterans Enrolled Veterans, who receive their health care with
VA, will receive the same, coordinated care, whether at their local VA
treatment site or an alternate VA site of care. In order to help VA ensure
Veterans receive consistent care while they are traveling, Veterans are
asked to notify their VA Patient Aligned Care Team (PACT) and specialty
care provider(s) four to six weeks before traveling, or as soon as possible.
Early planning will allow time for PACT and the Traveling Veteran Coordinator to coordinate care at an alternate VA facility. VA providers at the alternate site will record the care in the Veteran’s electronic medical record
for follow-up treatment options with their PACT. To coordinate health care
with another VA health care facility, Veterans should inform their PACT of
the following:
•travel destination(s), and temporary address
•a valid telephone number
•arrival and departure dates
•specific care concerns
Their PACT will contact the Traveling Veteran Coordinator, who will assist
in coordinating care at the alternate facility. For more information, contact PACT or a Traveling Veteran Coordinator at the local VA facility.
12

Benefits
Disability Compensation: Disability compensation is a tax-free monetary benefit paid to Veterans with disabilities that are the result of a
disease or injury incurred or aggravated during active military service. The
benefits amount is graduated according to the degree of the Veteran’s
disability on a scale from 10 percent to 100 percent (in increments of 10
percent). Compensation may also be paid for disabilities that are considered related or secondary to disabilities occurring in service and for disabilities presumed to be related to circumstances of military service, even
though they may arise after service.
To be eligible for compensation, the Veteran must have been separated or
discharged under conditions other than dishonorable. Monthly disability
compensation varies with the degree of disability and the number of
eligible dependents. Veterans with disability ratings of at least 30 percent
are eligible for additional allowances for dependents, including spouses,
minor children, children between the ages of 18 and 23 who are attending school, children who are permanently incapable of self-support
because of a disability arising before age 18, and dependent parents.
The additional amount depends on the disability rating and the number
of dependents. For detailed 2017 compensation rate information visit:
https://www.benefits.va.gov/COMPENSATION/resources_comp01.asp
The payment of military retirement pay, disability severance pay and
separation incentive payments, known as Special Separation Benefit (SSB)
and Reservists’ Involuntary Separation Pay (RISP), and Voluntary Separation (VSP), may affect the amount of VA compensation paid to disabled
Veterans. For additional details on types of disability claims and how to
apply, visit: https://www.benefits.va.gov/compensation/
Special Monthly Compensation (SMC): SMC is an additional tax-free
benefit that can be paid to Veterans as well as their spouses, surviving
spouses, and parents. For Veterans, SMC is a higher rate of compensation
paid, due to special circumstances such as the need for aid and attendance by another person, or due to a specific disability such as the loss of
use of one hand or leg. A Veteran who is determined by VA to be in need
of the regular aid and attendance of another person, or a Veteran who is
permanently housebound, may be entitled to additional payments. For
detailed 2017 special monthly compensation rate information visit: http://
www.benefits.va.gov/COMPENSATION/resources_comp02.asp .
13

Allowance for Aid and Attendance or Housebound Veterans: Veterans
determined by VA to be in need of the regular aid and attendance (A&A)
of another person, or permanently housebound, may be entitled to additional disability compensation or pension payments. A Veteran evaluated
at 30 percent or more disabled is entitled to receive an additional payment for a spouse who is in need of the aid and attendance of another
person. For additional information may be found at http://www.benefits.
va.gov/pension/aid_attendance_housebound.asp .
Automobile Allowance: As of Oct. 1, 2017, Veterans and service members may be eligible for a one-time payment of not more than $20,577.18
toward the purchase of an automobile or other conveyance if they have
service-connected loss or permanent loss of use of one or both hands or
feet, or permanent impairment of vision of both eyes to a certain degree.
To apply, contact a VA regional office at 1-800-827-1000 or the nearest VA
health care facility, which may be located at: https://www.va.gov/directory/guide/division.asp?dnum=1 .
Clothing Allowance: Any Veteran who has service-connected disabilities
that require prosthetic or orthopedic appliances may receive clothing
allowances. This allowance is also available to any Veteran whose serviceconnected skin condition requires prescribed medication that irreparably
damages outer garments. To apply, contact the prosthetic representative
at the nearest VA medical center located at: https://www.va.gov/directory/guide/division.asp?dnum=1&isFlash=0 .
For information on current rates visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/compensation/special_Benefit_Allowances_2017.asp
Additional Benefits for Eligible Military Retirees: Concurrent Retirement and Disability Pay (CRDP) is a DoD program that allows some
individuals to receive both military retired pay and VA disability compensation. Normally, such concurrent receipt is prohibited. Veterans do not
need to apply for this benefit, as payment is coordinated between VA
and the military pay center. To qualify for CRDP, Veterans must have a VA
service-connected disability rating of 50 percent or greater, be eligible to
receive retired pay, and:

14

•

Retire from military service based on longevity, including Temporary Early Retirement Authority (TERA) retirees; or

•

Retire due to disability with 20 or more years of service*; or

•

Retire from National Guard or Reserve service with 20 or more
qualifying years.

* For Veterans who retired due to disability with 20 or more years of
service, CRDP is subject to an offset for the difference between retired pay
based on disability and retired pay based on longevity.
Housing Grants for Disabled Veterans: Service members and Veterans
with certain service-connected disabilities may be entitled to a housing grant from VA to help build a new specially adapted house, to adapt
a home they already own, or buy a house and modify it to meet their
disability-related requirements. Eligible Veterans or service members may
now receive up to three uses of the grant, with the total dollar amount
of the grants not to exceed the maximum allowable. Housing grant
amounts may be adjusted Oct.1 every year based on a cost-of construction index. These adjustments will increase the grants amounts or leave
them unchanged; grant amounts will not decrease. Previous grant
recipients who had received assistance of less than the current maximum
allowable may be eligible for an additional grant usage. To obtain general
information about the Specially Adapted Housing program, visit: https://
www.benefits.va.gov/homeloans/adaptedhousing.asp or call the program’s local office of jurisdiction at 1-877-827-3702.
Specially Adapted Housing (SAH) Grant: VA may approve a grant of not
more than 50 percent of the cost of building, buying, or adapting existing homes or paying to reduce indebtedness on a currently owned home
that is being adapted, up to a maximum benefit amount of $81,080. In
certain instances, the full grant amount may be applied toward remodeling costs. The SAH grant is available to certain Veterans and service members who are entitled to disability compensation due to the following:
1. Loss or loss of use of both lower extremities, which so affects the
functions of balance or propulsion to preclude ambulating without the
aid of braces, crutches, canes or a wheelchair.
2. Loss or loss of use of both upper extremities at or above the elbow.
3. Blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, plus loss or
loss of use of one lower extremity.
4. Loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with (a) residuals of organic disease or injury, or (b) the loss or loss of use of one upper
extremity which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as
15

to preclude locomotion without the use of braces, canes, crutches or a
wheelchair.
5. Severe burn injuries, which are defined as full thickness or subdermal burns that have resulted in contractures with limitation of motion of
two or more extremities or of at least one extremity and the trunk.
6. The loss, or loss of use of one or more lower extremities due to
service on or after Sept. 11, 2001, which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude ambulating without the aid of braces,
crutches, canes, or a wheelchair. The authority for this specific entitlement
category expires Sept. 30, 2018. Note, the entitlement authority also has a
cap of 30 for the year.
Note: The property may be located outside the United States, in a country
or political subdivision which allows individuals to have or acquire a
beneficial property interest, and in which the Secretary of Veteran Affairs,
in his or her discretion, has determined that is reasonably practicable
to provide assistance in acquiring specially adapted housing. For more
information on SAH, visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/homeloans/adaptedhousing.asp or call the program’s local office of jurisdiction at 1-877827-3702.
Special Home Adaption (SHA) Grant: VA may approve a benefit amount
up to a maximum of $16,217 for the cost of necessary adaptations to a
service member’s or Veteran’s residence or to help him/her acquire a residence already adapted with special features for his/her disability, to purchase and adapt a home, or for adaptations to a family member’s home
in which he/she will reside. To be eligible for this grant, service members
and Veterans must be entitled to compensation for permanent and total
service-connected disability due to one of the following:
1. Blindness in both eyes with 20/200 acuity or less.
2. Anatomical loss or loss of use of both hands.
3. Severe burn injuries (see above).
4. Certain severe respiratory injuries.
Temporary Residence Adaptation (TRA): Eligible Veterans and service
members who are temporarily residing in a home owned by a family member may also receive a TRA grant to help the Veteran or service
member adapt the family member’s home to meet his or her special
needs. Those eligible for an $81,080 grant would be permitted to use up
to $35,593, and those eligible for a $16,217 grant would be permitted
to use up to $6,355. Under the Honoring America’s Veterans and Caring
16

for Camp LeJeune Families Act of 2012, TRA grant amounts do not count
against SAH or SHA grant maximum amounts, starting Aug. 6, 2013. Grant
amounts are adjusted annually Oct.1 based on a cost-of-construction
index.
Supplemental Financing: Veterans and service members with available
VA Home Loan Guaranty entitlement may also obtain a guaranteed loan
to supplement the grant to acquire a specially adapted home. For more
information on SAH, visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/homeloans/sah.asp
Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (VR&E): VR&E, also referred to as the Chapter 31 program, provides services to eligible service members and Veterans with service-connected disabilities and an
employment handicap to help them to prepare for, obtain, and maintain
suitable employment. For Veterans and service members with serviceconnected disabilities so severe that they cannot immediately consider
work, VR&E provides services to improve their ability to live as independently as possible. For additional information on VR&E benefits please
visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/vocrehab/index.asp
VR&E Eligibility for Veterans: A Veteran must have a VA service connected disability rating of at least 20 percent and determined to have an
employment handicap, or rated 10 percent and determined to have a
serious employment handicap, and must be discharged or released from
active military service under other than dishonorable conditions.
VR&E Eligibility: Service members are eligible to apply if they expect
to receive an honorable discharge upon separation from active duty,
obtain a memorandum rating of 20 percent or more from VA, or obtain a
proposed Disability Evaluation System (DES) rating of 20 percent or more
from VA, or obtain a referral to a Physical Evaluation Board (PEB) through
the Integrated Disability Evaluation System (IDES).
VR&E Entitlement: A Vocational Rehabilitation Counselor (VRC) works
with the Veteran to determine if an employment handicap exists. An
employment handicap exists if a Veteran’s service-connected disability impairs his/her ability to prepare for, obtain, and maintain suitable
employment. After an entitlement decision is determined, the Veteran
and VRC work together to develop an individualized rehabilitation plan.
The individualized rehabilitation plan outlines the necessary rehabilitation services to be provided to the Veterans and service members that are
wounded, ill, injured, or in the IDES program can receive National Defense
Authorization Act authorized entitlement to VR&E when automatic refer17

ral by their chain of command.
VR&E Services: Veterans work with a VRC to select one of the five tracks
to employment based on their individualized needs. The Five Tracks to
Employment provide greater emphasis on exploring employment options
early in the rehabilitation planning process, better informed choices for
the Veteran regarding occupational and employment options, faster access to employment for Veterans who have identifiable and transferable
skills for direct placement into suitable employment, and an option for
Veterans who are not able to work, but need assistance to lead a more independent life. If a program of training is selected, VA pays the cost of the
approved training and services (except those coordinated through other
providers) that are outlined in the Veteran’s rehabilitation plan, including
subsistence allowance.
The Five Tracks to Employment are: Reemployment with previous
employer, Rapid access to employment, Self-employment, Employment
through long-term services, and Independent living services.
Period of a Rehabilitation Program: The basic period of eligibility in
which VR&E benefits may be used is 12 years from the latter of the following: 1) A Veteran’s date of separation from active military service, or
2) The date VA first notified a Veteran that he/she has been granted a
compensable service-connected disability. Veterans may be provided up
to 48 months of full-time services or the part-time equivalent based on
the extent of services needed to complete the rehabilitation program.
Rehabilitation plans that provide services to achieve the maximum level
of independence cannot exceed 24 months which may be extended in
certain circumstances.
Employment Services: In partnership with the Department of Labor, VA
provides support to Veterans and transitioning service members at all
stages of their job search, including career advice, resume building, and
access to employers who want to hire Veterans and military spouses. Additional information and access to services are available at https://www.
vets.gov/employment/
VR&E also establishes partnerships with Federal, state, and private agencies that help facilitate direct placement of Veterans or service members
into civilian careers. VR&E can assist with placement using the following
resources:
On the Job Training (OJT) Program: Employers hire Veterans at an ap18

prentice wage, and VR&E supplements the salary at the journey-man
wage (up to the maximum amount allowable under OJT). As the Veterans
progress through training, the employers begin to increase the salary until the Veterans reach journeyman level and the employers pay the entire
salary. VR&E may also pay for any necessary tools.
Non-Paid Work Experience (NPWE): The NPWE program provides eligible Veterans the opportunity to obtain training and practical job experience concurrently. This program is ideal for Veterans or service members
who have a clearly established vocational goal and who learn easily in a
hands-on environment. This program is also well suited for Veterans who
are having difficulties obtaining employment due to lack of work experience. The NPWE program may be established in a federal, state, or local
(i.e. city, town, school district) government agencies only. The employer
may hire the Veteran at any point during the NPWE program.
Special Employer Incentive (SEI): The SEI program is for eligible Veterans who face challenges in obtaining employment. Veterans approved to
participate in the SEI program are hired by participating employers and
employment is expected to continue following successful completion of
the program. Employers are provided this incentive to hire Veterans. If
approved, the employer will receive reimbursement for up to 50 percent
of the Veteran’s salary during the SEI program, which can last up to six
months.
VetSuccess on Campus (VSOC): The VSOC program aims to help Veterans, service members, and eligible dependents succeed through a coordinated delivery of on-campus benefits assistance and counseling, leading
to successful completion of their education and preparing them to enter
the labor market in viable careers. For additional information on the VSOC
program please visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/vocrehab/vsoc.asp .
Chapter 36 Education and Career Counseling: VA’s Education and
Career Counseling Program (Title 38 U.S.C. Chapter 36) offers a great opportunity for transitioning Veterans, service members, and dependents
to get personalized counseling and support to guide their career paths,
ensure the most effective use of their VA benefits, and help them achieve
their goals. For additional information please visit: http://www.benefits.
va.gov/VOCREHAB/edu_voc_counseling.asp . To apply for this program,
visit: https://www.ebenefits.va.gov
VA Pension: VA helps Veterans and their families cope with financial challenges by providing supplemental income through the Veterans Pension
19

and Survivors Pension benefit programs. Payments are made to bring
the Veteran’s or Survivor’s total income, including other retirement or
Social Security income, to a level set by Congress. Unreimbursed medical
expenses may reduce countable income for VA purposes.
Veterans Pension: Congress establishes the maximum annual Veterans
Pension rates. Payments are reduced by the amount of countable income
of the Veteran, spouse, and dependent children. When a Veteran without
a spouse or a child is furnished nursing home or domiciliary care by VA,
the pension is reduced to an amount not to exceed $90 per month after
three calendar months of care. The reduction may be delayed if nursinghome care is continued to provide the Veteran with rehabilitation services. To apply for increased pension based on A&A or Housebound payments, write to the Pension Management Center that serves your state
and provide medical evidence, such as a doctor’s report, that validates
the need for an increased benefit. For additional information on pension
benefits please visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/pension/
Eligibility for Veterans Pension: Generally, a Veteran must have at
least 90 days of active duty service, with at least one day during a VArecognized wartime period to qualify for a VA pension. The 90-day active
service requirement does not apply to Veterans discharged from the
military due to a service-connected disability. Veterans who entered
active duty after Sept. 7, 1980, generally must have served at least 24
months of the full period for which called or ordered to active duty (with
some exceptions), with at least one day during a war time period. In addition to meeting minimum service requirement, low-income wartime
Veterans may qualify for pension if they meet certain service, income and
net worth limits set by law and are: Age 65 or older, OR permanently and
totally disabled, OR a patient in a nursing home receiving skilled nursing care, OR receiving Social Security Disability Insurance, OR receiving
Supplemental Security Income.
Yearly family income must be less than the amount set by Congress to
qualify for the Veterans Pension benefit. Payments are made to bring
the Veteran’s total income, including other retirement or Social Security
income, to a level set by Congress. Unreimbursed medical expenses may
reduce countable income for VA purposes.
Note: Veterans may have to meet longer minimum periods of active
duty if they entered active duty on or after Sept. 8, 1980, or, if they were
officers who entered active duty on or after Oct. 16, 1981. The Veteran’s
discharge must have been under conditions other than dishonorable,
20

and the disability must be for reasons other than the Veteran’s own willful
misconduct.
How to Apply for Veterans Pension: To apply for Veterans Pension,
download and complete VA Form 21P 527EZ, “Application for Pension”.
You can mail your application to the Pension Management Center (PMC)
that serves your state. You may also visit your local regional benefit office
and turn in your application for processing. You can locate your local regional benefit office using the VA Facility Locator. For additional information on pension benefits please visit http://www.benefits.va.gov/pension
Aid and Attendance and Housebound Benefits (Special Monthly Pension): Veterans and survivors who are eligible for VA pension and require
the aid and attendance of another person, or are housebound, may
be eligible for a higher maximum annual pension rate. These benefits
are paid in addition to monthly pension, and they are not paid without
eligibility to pension. Since aid and attendance and housebound allowances increase the pension amount, people who are not eligible for a
basic pension due to excessive income may be eligible for pension at
these increased rates. A Veteran or surviving spouse may not receive aid
and attendance benefits and housebound benefits at the same time. For
additional information on aid and attendance and housebound benefits
including how to apply please visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/pension/
aid_attendance_housebound.asp
Education and Training Benefits
Post–9/11 GI Bill: The Post-9/11 GI Bill is an education benefit program
for service members and Veterans who served on active duty after
Sept.10, 2001. Benefits are payable for training pursued on or after Aug. 1,
2009. No payments can be made under this program for training pursued
before that date. For additional information on education and training
opportunities please visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/ or by calling
1-888-GI-BILL-1 (1-888-442-4551).
Post - 9/11 GI Bill Eligibility: To be eligible, the service member or Veteran must serve at least 90 aggregate days on active duty after Sept. 10,
2001, and remain on active duty or be honorably discharged. Active duty
includes active service performed by National Guard members under
title 32 U.S.C. for the purposes of organizing, administering, recruiting,
instructing, or training the National Guard; or under section 502(f ) for the
purpose of responding to a national emergency. Veterans may also be
eligible if they were honorably discharged from active duty for a service21

connected disability after serving 30 continuous days after Sept. 10, 2001.
Additionally, under the Colmery Act of 2017, also known as the “Forever GI
Bill,” all Purple Heart award recipients are eligible for Post 9/11 GI Bill entitlement providing the award was made during service occurring on or after
Sept. 11, 2001, and the recipient continues on duty or receives an honorable discharge.
Contents of Benefit: Generally, service members or eligible Veterans may
receive up to 36 months of entitlement under the Post-9/11 GI Bill. Based
on the length of active duty service, eligible participants are entitled to
receive a percentage of the cost of in-state tuition and fees at public institutions or the tuition and fees capped at a national maximum rate for private
or foreign schools. Current rates can be found at http://www.benefits.
va.gov/GIBILL/resources/benefits_resources/rate_tables.asp . The percentages and corresponding service requirements are noted in the chart below.
Service requirements after 9/10/01,
an individual must serve an
aggregate of:

At least 36 months
At least 30 continuous days on
active duty and discharged due to a
service connected disability
At least 30 months, but less than 36
Months
At least 24 months, but less than 30
Months
**At least 18 months, but less than
24 Months
**At least 12 months, but less than
18 Months
**At least 6 months, but less than
12 Months***
**At least 90 days, but less than 6
Months***

Payment Tiers Percentage

100 percent
100 percent
90 percent
80 percent
70 percent
60 percent
50 percent
40 percent

**Excludes time in basic military training and/or skill training.
***The Colmery Act will change the required amount of service noted
22

above, effective 08/01/2020, resulting in more generous percentage of
eligibility for service less than 12 months.
If a service members or Veteran is eligible for the Montgomery GI Bill;
the Montgomery GI Bill- Selected Reserve; or the Reserve Educational
Assistance Program, and qualifies for the Post-9/11 GI Bill, an irrevocable
election must be made to receive benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill. In
most instances, once the election to receive benefits under the Post-9/11
GI Bill is made, the individual will no longer be eligible to receive benefits
under the relinquished program.
Tuition and fees are paid to the institution on the student’s behalf
(2017/2018: $22,805.34 and 2018/-2019: $23,671.94) as well as a monthly
Housing Allowance (MHA) currently equal to the basic allowance for
housing payable to a military E-5 with dependents, in the same ZIP code
of the main campus of the primary school (paid directly to the Veteran,
or eligible dependents) but pro-rated based on benefit level and rate of
pursuit (e.g., full-time student, ¾-time student, etc.). Please note, however, that MHA is not payable to individuals enrolled in flight or correspondence training, to individuals while pursuing training at half time or less
(regardless of the type of training), or to individuals while on active duty
or their spouses.
However, effective Aug. 1, 2018, under the Colmery Act, the MHA will
be calculated based on the ZIP code of the campus location where the
student physically attends a majority of classes rather than the location of
the main campus of the school.
Additional benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill include a yearly books
and supplies stipend of up to $1,000 per year (paid directly to the service
member, Veteran, or eligible dependents), and a one-time payment of
$500 paid to certain individuals relocating from highly rural areas.
Approved training under the Post-9/11 GI Bill includes graduate and
undergraduate degrees, vocational/technical training, on-the job and
apprenticeship training, flight training, correspondence training, licensing
and national testing programs, and tutorial assistance.
The Yellow Ribbon G.I. Bill Education Enhancement Program: The Yellow Ribbon Program allows institutions of higher learning (such as colleges, universities, and other degree-granting schools) in the United States
to voluntarily enter into an agreement with VA to fund tuition and fees
that exceed the amounts payable under the Post-9/11 GI Bill. The institu23

tion can contribute a specified dollar amount of those expenses, and VA
will match the contribution, not to exceed 50 percent of the difference.
To be eligible, the student must be a Veteran or a transfer-of-entitlementeligible dependent child receiving benefit at the 100-percent benefit rate.
It is not available to active-duty-service members or their spouses using
transferred entitlement, regardless of benefit level, or Marine Gunnery
Sergeant John David Fry Scholarship (Fry Scholarship) recipients. However the Colmery Act will expand the Yellow Ribbon Program, as of Aug. 1,
2018, to include individuals who were awarded a Purple Heart on or after
Sept. 11, 2001, as well as Fry Scholarship recipients, and, as of Aug. 1,
2022, to include active-duty service members eligible at the 100-percent
benefit level, and their spouses using transferred entitlement.
Marine Gunnery Sergeant John David Fry Scholarship Eligibility: The
Fry Scholarship provides Post-9/11 GI Bill® benefits to the children and
surviving spouses of service members who died in the line of duty after
Sept. 10, 2001. Eligible beneficiaries attending school may receive up to
36 months of benefits at the 100-percent level. The Fry Scholarship includes full tuition and fees paid directly to the school for all public school
in-state students. For those attending private or foreign schools, tuition
and fees are capped at a statutory maximum amount per academic year.
A monthly housing allowance and a books and supplies stipend are also
paid to the student.
Surviving children who are eligible may begin an approved program of
education before the age of 18. A child’s marital status has no effect on
eligibility. Eligible children are entitled to 36 months of benefits at the
100-percent level. If the qualifying parent’s death occurred before Jan. 1,
2013, the child’s eligibility ends on his or her 33rd birthday. If the qualifying parent’s death occurred on or after Jan. 1, 2013, the child’s eligibility
never expires.
Surviving spouses who are eligible have no timeline on when they can
use the benefit; however, a spouse will lose eligibility for this benefit
upon remarriage.

Survivor’s & Dependents’ Educational Assistance (DEA): The Survivors’
and Dependents’ Educational Assistance (DEA) program offers education
and training opportunities to eligible dependents of Veterans who are
permanently and totally disabled due to a service-related condition or of
Veterans who died while on active duty or as a result of a service-related
24

condition. Eligible surviving dependents may be eligible for 45 months of
degree and certificate courses, apprenticeship, and on-the-job training.
To be eligible, you must be the son, daughter, or spouse of:
•

A Veteran who died or is permanently and totally disabled as the
result of a service-connected disability. The disability must arise
out of active service in the armed forces.

•

A Veteran who died from any cause while such permanent and
total service-connected disability was in existence.

•

A service member missing in action or captured in line of duty by
a hostile force.

•

A service member forcibly detained or interned in line of duty by
a foreign government or power.

•

A service member who is hospitalized or receiving outpatient
treatment for a service connected permanent and total disability
and is likely to be discharged for that disability. This change is
effective December. 23, 2006.

Surviving spouses lose eligibility if they remarry before age 57 or are
living with another person who has been recognized publicly as their
spouse. They can regain eligibility if their remarriage ends by death or
divorce or if they cease living with the person. Dependent children do not
lose eligibility if the surviving spouse remarries.
Provisions of the Colmery Act of 2017 will limit the months of benefit
entitlement under DEA to 36 months (instead of 45) if enrollment in an
education program occurs after Aug. 1, 2018.
Visit https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/survivor_dependent_assistance.
asp for more information.
Period of Eligibility: The period of eligibility for Veterans’ spouses expires
10 years from either the date they become eligible or the date of the Veteran’s death. Children generally must be between the ages of 18 and 26
to receive educational benefits. VA may grant extensions to both spouses
and children. The period of eligibility for spouses of service members who
died on active duty expires 20 years from the date of death. Spouses of
service members who died during active duty whose 10-year eligibility
period expired before Dec. 10, 2004 have 20 years from the date of death
25

to use educational benefits.
Training Available: Benefits may be awarded for pursuit of associate, bachelor, or graduate degrees at colleges and universities; independent study;
cooperative training; study abroad; certificate or diploma from business,
technical, or vocational schools; apprenticeships; on-the-job training programs; farm cooperative courses; and preparatory courses for tests required
or used for admission to an institution of higher learning or graduate school.
Benefits for correspondence courses under certain conditions are available to spouses only. Beneficiaries without high-school degrees can pursue
secondary schooling, and those with a deficiency in a subject may receive
tutorial assistance if enrolled half-time or more.
Special Benefits: Dependents over age 14 with physical or mental disabilities that impair their ability to pursue an education may receive specialized
vocational or restorative training, including speech and voice correction,
language retraining, lip reading, auditory training, Braille reading and writing, and similar programs. Certain disabled or surviving spouses are also
eligible. For additional information on Survivors & Dependents’ Educational
Assistance (DEA) visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/GIBILL/DEA.asp.
Montgomery GI Bill Active Duty (MGIB-AD): The MGIB-AD (Chapter 30) is
an education benefit that provides up to 36 months of education benefits
to eligible Veterans and service members for college degree and certificate
programs, technical or vocational courses, flight training, apprenticeships
or on-the-job training, high tech training, licensing and certification test,
entrepreneurship training, certain entrance examinations, and correspondence courses. Remedial, deficiency, and refresher courses may be approved under certain circumstances. Benefits generally expire 10 years after
discharge. Current payment rates are available at https://benefits.va.gov/
GIBILL/resources/benefits_resources/rates/ch30/ch30rates100117.asp. A
Veteran may be eligible for this benefit if he or she entered active duty after
June 30, 1985, has an honorable discharge, did not decline MGIB in writing,
and served three continuous years of active duty (or have an obligation to
serve four years in the Selected Reserve after active duty service). There are
exceptions for disability, re-entering active duty, and upgraded discharges.
All participants must have a high school diploma, equivalency certificate,
or have completed 12 hours toward a college degree before applying for
benefits.
GI Bill Resident-Rate Requirements: Section 3679, title 38, United States
Code, requires VA to disapprove programs of education for payment of
26

benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill and Montgomery GI Bill-Active Duty
at public Institutions of Higher Learning (IHLs) if the school charges qualifying Veterans and dependents tuition and fees in excess of the rate for
resident students. To remain approved for VA’s GI Bill programs, schools
must charge in-state tuition and fee amounts to “covered individuals.” A
covered individual is defined as: A Veteran who lives in the state where
the IHL is located (regardless of his/her formal state of residence) and enrolls in the school within three years of discharge from a period of active
duty service of 90 days or more.
An individual using transferred benefits who lives in the state where the
IHL is located (regardless of his/her formal state of residence) and enrolls
in the school within three years of the transferor’s discharge from a period
of active duty service of 90 days or more.
•

Anyone described above while he or she remains continuously
enrolled (other than during regularly scheduled breaks between
courses, semesters, or terms) at the same school. The person so
described must have enrolled in the school prior to the expiration of the three-year period following discharge or release as
described above and must be using educational benefits under
either chapter 30 or chapter 33, of title 38, United States Code.

•

Anyone using transferred Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits who lives in
the state where the IHL is located and the transferor is a member
of the uniformed service who is serving on active duty.

•

Anyone using benefits under the Marine Gunnery Sergeant John
David Fry Scholarship who lives in the state where the IHL is
located (regardless of his/her formal state of residence).

•

The in-state tuition provisions do not apply to those individuals on active duty using benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill and
Montgomery GI Bill-Active Duty.

Home Loan Guaranty: VA home loan guaranties are issued to help
eligible service members, Veterans, Reservists, National Guard members,
and certain surviving spouses obtain homes, condominiums, and manufactured homes, and to refinance loans.
Home Loan Guaranty Uses: A VA loan guaranty helps protect lenders
from loss if the borrower fails to repay the loan. It can be used to obtain a
loan to: Buy an existing dwelling or build a home; buy a residential con27

dominium unit; repair, alter, or improve a residence owned and occupied
by the Veteran; refinance an existing home loan; buy a manufactured
home and/or lot and install a solar heating or cooling system or other
energy-efficient improvements.
Home Loan Guaranty Eligibility: Eligibility applications can be submitted electronically through eBenefits (www.ebenefits.va.gov ) or by going
through your lender, who will use the Automated Certificate of Eligibility
system.
Although it’s preferable for lenders and Veterans to apply electronically
due to a majority of these requests being approved instantaneously by
the eligibility system, it is possible to apply for a Certificate of Eligibility
(COE) using VA Form 26-1880, Request for Certificate of Eligibility. Please
note that while VA’s electronic applications can establish eligibility and
issue an online COE in a matter of seconds, the system can only process
cases for which VA has sufficient data in its records. Therefore, certain applicants will not be able to establish eligibility online and additional information might be requested prior to the issuance of a COE. If a COE cannot
be issued immediately, users have the option of submitting a hardcopy
application. If applying manually for a COE using VA Form 26-1880, it is
typically necessary that the eligible Veteran to present a copy of his/her
report of discharge or DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge
from Active Duty, or other adequate substitute evidence to VA, and be
aware that it could take more time to process requests in this manner. An
eligible active duty service member should obtain and submit a statement of service signed by an appropriate military official to the appropriate Regional Loan Center mentioned on VA Form 26-1880. For general
program information or to obtain VA loan guaranty forms please visit
http://www.benefits.va.gov/homeloans/ or call 1-877-827-3702 to reach
the home loan program’s local office of jurisdiction.
A completed VA Form 26-1880 and any associated documentation should
be mailed to the nearest Regional Loan Center (RLC) of jurisdiction. The
RLC jurisdictions and mailing addresses are located on page 3 of VA Form
26-1880,
http://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/vba-26-1880-are.pdf.
Credit and Income Qualifications: In addition to the periods of eligibility and conditions of service requirements, applicants must have sufficient income and credit, and agree to live in the property in order to be
approved by a lender for a VA home loan.
Surviving Spouses: Some spouses of Veterans may have home loan eligibility: The unmarried surviving spouse of a Veteran who died as a result
28

of service or service-connected causes: The surviving spouse of a Veteran
who dies on active duty or from service connected causes, who remarries on or after attaining age 57 and on or after December 16, 2003: The
spouse of an active duty member who is listed as missing in action (MIA)
or a prisoner of war (POW) for at least 90 days.
Eligibility under the MIA/POW: Provisions are limited to one-time use
only. Surviving spouses of Veterans who died from nonservice –connected causes may also be eligible if any of the following conditions are met:
The Veteran was rated totally service-connected disabled for 10 years or
more immediately preceding death, or was rated totally disabled for not
less than five years from date of discharge or release from active duty to
date of death, or was a former prisoner of war who died after Sept. 30,
1999, and was rated totally service connected disabled for not less than
one year immediately preceding death.
Home Loan Guaranty Limits: VA does not make loans to Veterans and
service members; VA guarantees loans made by private sector lenders.
The guaranty is what VA could pay a lender should the loan go to foreclosure. VA does not set a cap on how much an individual can borrow to
refinance a home. However, there are limits on the amount of liability VA
can assume, which usually affects the amount of money an institution
will lend. For information on loan limits please visit: http://www.benefits.
va.gov/homeloans/purchaseco_loan_limits.asp .
Other Types of Loans: An eligible borrower can use a VA-guaranteed
Interest Rate Reduction Refinancing Loan to refinance an existing VA loan
and lower the interest rate and payment. Typically, no credit underwriting
is required for this type of loan. The loan may include the entire outstanding balance of the prior loan, the costs of energy-efficient improvements,
and closing costs, including up to two discounts points. An eligible borrower who wishes to obtain a VA-guaranteed loan to purchase a manufactured home or lot can borrow up to 95percent of the home’s purchase
price. The amount VA will guarantee on a manufactured home loan is 40
percent of the loan amount or the Veteran’s available entitlement, up to a
maximum amount of $20,000. These provisions apply only to a manufactured home that will not be placed on a permanent foundation.
Home Loan Guaranty Appraisals: In most cases, a home loan cannot
be guaranteed by VA without first being appraised by a VA-assigned fee
appraiser. A home appraisal by a VA- assigned fee appraiser is required
for purchase and certain refinance loans guaranteed by VA. A lender can
29

request a VA appraisal through VA systems. The Veteran borrower typically pays for the appraisal upon completion, according to a fee schedule
approved by VA. This VA appraisal estimates value of the property. An
appraisal is not an inspection and does not guarantee the house is free of
defects. VA guarantees the loan, not the condition of the property.
A thorough inspection of the property by a reputable inspection firm
may help minimize any problems that could arise after loan closing. In an
existing home, particular attention should be given to plumbing, heating,
electrical, roofing, and structural components. In addition, VA strongly
recommends testing for radon, a known carcinogen.
Home Loan Guaranty Closing Costs: For purchase home loans, payment
in cash is required on all closing costs, including title search and recording fees, hazard insurance premiums, and prepaid taxes. For refinancing
loans, all such costs may be included in the loan, as long as the total
loan does not exceed the reasonable value of the property. Interest rate
reduction loans may include closing costs, including a maximum of two
discount points.
Home Loan Guaranty Funding Fees: The funding fee is a percentage
of the loan amount collected in order to offset future anticipated costs
associated with the loan. A funding fee must be paid to VA unless the Veteran is exempt from such a fee. Currently, exemptions from the funding
fee are provided for Veterans and service members receiving VA disability
compensation, those who are rated by VA as eligible to receive compensation as a result of pre-discharge disability examination and rating, and
those who would be in receipt of compensation, but who were recalled
to active duty or reenlisted and are receiving active-duty pay in lieu of
compensation. Additionally, unmarried surviving spouses in receipt of
dependency and indemnity compensation may be exempt. The fee may
be paid in cash or included in the loan. For all types of loans, the loan
amount may include the VA funding fee and up to $6,000 of energyefficient improvements.
However, no other fees including fees for the VA appraisal, credit report,
loan processing fee, title search, title insurance, recording fees, transfer
taxes, survey charges, or hazard insurance charges, or discount points
may be included in loans for purchase or construction. For refinancing
loans, most closing costs may be included in the loan amount.
Home Loan Guaranty Required Occupancy: To qualify for a VA home
loan, a Veteran or the spouse of an active-duty service member must
30

certify that he or she intends to occupy the home. A dependent child of
an active-duty service member also satisfies the occupancy requirement.
When refinancing a VA-guaranteed loan solely to reduce the interest rate,
a Veteran only needs to certify prior occupancy.
Home Loan Guaranty Financing, Interest Rates and Terms: Veterans
obtain VA-guaranteed loans through the usual lending institutions,
including banks, credit unions, and mortgage brokers. VA-guaranteed
loans can have either a fixed interest rate or an adjustable rate, where
the interest rate may adjust up to 1 percent annually and up to 5 percent
over the life of the loan. VA does not set the interest rate. Interest rates are
negotiable between the lender and borrower on all loan types.
Veterans may also choose a different type of adjustable rate mortgage
called a hybrid ARM, where the initial interest rate remains fixed for 3-10
years. If the rate remains fixed for less than five years, the rate adjustment
cannot be more than 1 percent annually and 5 percent over the life of the
loan. For a hybrid ARM with an initial fixed period of five years or more,
the initial adjustment may be up to 2 percent.
The Secretary has the authority to determine annual adjustments thereafter. Currently, annual adjustments may be up to 2 percentage point and
6 percent over the life of the loan. If the lender charges discounts points
on the loan, the Veteran may negotiate with the seller as to who will pay
points or if they will be split between buyer and seller. Points paid by the
Veteran may not be included in the loan (with the exception that up to
two points may be included in interest rate reduction refinancing loans).
The term of the loan may be for as long as 30 years and 32 days.
Home Loan Guaranty Assumption Requirements and Liability: VA
loans made on or after March 1, 1988, are not assumable without the prior approval of VA or its authorized agent (usually the lender collecting the
monthly payments). To approve the assumption, the lender must ensure
that the purchaser is a satisfactory credit risk and will assume all of the
Veteran’s liabilities on the loan. If approved, the purchaser will have to pay
a funding fee that the lender sends to VA, and the Veteran will be released
from liability to the federal government. (A VA-guaranteed loan may be
assumed by Veterans, active duty personnel, and non-Veterans alike.)
Loans made prior to March 1, 1988, are generally freely assumable, but
Veterans should still request the lender’s approval in order to be released
of liability. Veterans whose loans were closed after December 31, 1989,
usually have no liability to the government following a foreclosure,
31

except in cases involving fraud, misrepresentation, or bad faith, such as
allowing an unapproved assumption. However, for the entitlement to be
restored, any loss suffered by VA must be paid in full.
A release of liability does not mean that a Veteran’s guaranty entitlement
is restored. That occurs only if the borrower is an eligible Veteran who
agrees to substitute his or her entitlement for that of the seller. If the Veteran allows assumptions of a loan without prior approval, then the lender
may demand immediate and full payment of the loan, and the Veteran
may be liable if the loan is foreclosed and VA has to pay a claim under the
loan guaranty.
VA Assistance to Veterans in Default: When a VA-guaranteed home
loan becomes delinquent; VA may provide supplemental servicing assistance to help cure the default. The servicer has the primary responsibility
of servicing the loan to resolve the default, and VA urges all Veterans who
are encountering problems making their mortgage payments to speak
with their servicers as soon as possible to explore options to avoid foreclosure. Contrary to popular opinion, servicers do not want to foreclose,
because foreclosure costs money. Depending on a Veteran’s specific situation, servicers may offer any of the following options to avoid foreclosure:
•
•

•
•
•

32

Repayment Plan – the borrower makes a regular installment
each month plus part of the missed installments.
Special Forbearance – the servicer agrees not to initiate foreclosure to allow time for borrowers to repay the missed installments
or agrees to place a hold or postpone foreclosures proceedings.
An example of when this would be likely is when a borrower is
waiting for a tax refund.
Loan Modification – provides the borrower a fresh start by adding the delinquency to the loan balance and establishing a new
payment schedule.
Short Sale – when the servicer agrees to allow a borrower to sell
his/her home for a lesser amount than what is currently required
to pay off the loan.
Deed-in-Lieu of Foreclosure – the borrower voluntarily agrees
to deed the property to the servicer instead of going through a
lengthy foreclosure process. In cases where the servicer is unable
to help the Veteran borrower, VA has loan technicians at its eight
RLCs and in Hawaii, who are available to take an active role in
interceding with the mortgage servicer. Veterans with VA-guaranteed home loans can call 1-877-827- 3702 to discuss potential
ways to help save the loan.

Service Members Civil Relief Act (SCRA) and Home Loan Guaranties:
Veteran borrowers may be able to request relief pursuant to the SCRA. In
order to qualify for certain protections available under the Act, their obligation must have originated prior to their current period of active military
service. SCRA may provide a lower interest rate during military service
and for up to one year after service ends, provide forbearance, or prevent
foreclosure or eviction up to nine months from period of military service.
Assistance to Veterans with VA-Guaranteed Home Loans: When a
VA-guaranteed home loan becomes delinquent; VA may provide supplemental servicing assistance to help cure the default. The servicer has
the primary responsibility of servicing the loan to resolve the default.
Veterans with VA-guaranteed home loans can call 1-877-827-3702 to
reach the nearest VA office where loan specialists are prepared to discuss
potential ways to help save the loan.
Assistance to Veterans with Non-VA Guaranteed Home Loans in Default: VA advises Veterans or service members who are having difficulty
making payments on a non-VA-guaranteed loan to contact their servicer
as quickly as possible to explore options to avoid foreclosure. Although
for non-VA loans, VA does not have authority to directly intervene on the
borrower’s behalf, VA’s network of loan technicians at eight Regional Loan
Centers and an office in Hawaii can offer advice and guidance on how to
potentially avoid foreclosure. Veterans or service members with non-VAloans may call 1-877-827-3702 to speak with a VA loan technician, or
visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/homeloans/, for more information on
avoiding foreclosure.
If VA is not able to help a Veteran borrower retain his/her home (whether
a VA-guaranteed loan or not), the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) offers assistance to homeowners by sponsoring local
housing counseling agencies. To find an approved agency in your area,
search online at https://apps.hud.gov/offices/hsg/sfh/hcc/hcs.cfm or call
HUD’s interactive voice system at 1-800-569-4287.
VA Refinancing of a Non-VA Guaranteed Home Loan: Veterans with
non-VA guaranteed home loans now have new options for refinancing to
a VA-guaranteed home loan. These new options are available as a result
of the Veterans’ Benefits Improvement Act of 2008. Veterans who wish to
refinance their subprime or conventional mortgage may now do so for up
to 100 percent of value of the property.

33

Other Assistance for Delinquent Veteran Borrowers: If VA is not able to
help a Veteran borrower retain his/her home (whether a VA-guaranteed
loan or not), the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
offers assistance to homeowners by sponsoring local housing counseling agencies. To find an approved agency in your area, please visit: http://
www.hud.gov/offices/hsg/sfh/hcc/hcs.cfm , or call HUD’s interactive voice
system at 1-800-569-4287.
Preventing Veteran Homelessness: Veterans who believe they may be
facing homelessness as a result of losing their homes can call 1-877-4AIDVET (877-424-3838) or visit: https://www.va.gov/homeless/ to receive
assistance in preventing homelessness.
VA Acquired Property Sales: VA acquires properties as a result of foreclosures of VA-guaranteed and VA-owned loans. A private contractor currently markets the acquired properties through listing agents using local
Multiple Listing Services. A listing of “VA Properties for Sale” may be found
at http://listings.vrmco.com/. Contact a real estate agent for information
on purchasing a VA-acquired property.
Loans for Native American Veterans: Eligible Native American Veterans
can obtain a loan from VA to purchase, construct, or improve a home on
federal Trust Land, or to reduce the interest rate on such a VA loan. Native
American Direct Loans (NADL) are only available if a memorandum of
understanding exists between the tribal organization and VA. Veterans
who are not Native American, but who are married to Native American
non-Veterans, may be eligible for a direct loan under this program.
To be eligible for such a loan, the qualified non-Native American Veteran
and the Native American spouse must reside on federal Trust Land, both
the Veteran and spouse must have a meaningful interest in the dwelling
or lot, and the tribal authority that has jurisdiction over the Trust Land
must recognize the non-Native American Veteran as subject to its authority. For additional information about the NADL program please visit:
http://www.benefits.va.gov/homeloans/nadl.asp .
VA Life Insurance: VA’s life insurance benefits open to new applicants
include Service members’ Group Life Insurance, Veterans’ Group Life
Insurance, Family Service members’ Group Life Insurance, Service members’ Group Life Insurance Traumatic Injury Protection, Service-Disabled
Veterans’ Insurance, and Veterans’ Mortgage Life Insurance.
These programs are described below. Complete details are also available
34

at: http://www.benefits.va.gov/insurance/; or by writing to Department
of Veterans Affairs, Insurance Center, P.O. Box 42954, Philadelphia, PA
19101or by calling VA’s Insurance Center toll-free at 1-800-669-8477.
Specialists are available between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 6 p.m. (EST)
Monday through Friday to discuss: eligibility, premium payments, insurance dividends, address changes, policy loans, naming beneficiaries,
reporting the death of the insured and other insurance issues.
For information about Service Members’ Group Life Insurance, Veterans’
Group Life Insurance, Service Members’ Group Life Insurance Traumatic
Injury Protection or Family Service Members’ Group Life Insurance coverage, please visit: http://www.benefits.va.gov/insurance/; or call the Office
of service members’ Group Life Insurance directly at 1-800-419-1473.
Service Members’ Group Life Insurance (SGLI): The following persons
are automatically insured by law for $400,000 under SGLI:
•

Active-duty members of the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines and
Coast Guard

•

Commissioned members of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

•

U.S. Public Health Service (UPHS)

•

Cadets or midshipmen of the U.S. military academies

•

Members, cadets and midshipmen of the Reserved Officers
Training Corps (ROTC) while engaged in authorized training and
practice cruises

•

Members of the Ready Reserves/National Guard who are scheduled to perform at least 12 periods of inactive training per year

•

Service members who volunteer for a mobilization category in
the Individual Ready Reserve (IRR).

Individuals may elect in writing to be covered for less than $400,000
or to decline coverage. SGLI coverage is available in $50,000 increments up to the maximum of $400,000. Full-time service members
on active duty are covered 24 hours a day, 7 days a week for 365 days
of the year.
Full Time SGLI Coverage: Full-time coverage is in effect during
35

periods of active duty and for Ready Reserve and National Guard
members scheduled to perform at least 12 periods of inactive duty
training per year. Coverage is also provided for 120 days after separation or release from duty for service members who quality for fulltime SGLI coverage.
Reservists or National Guard members who have been assigned to
a unit in which they are scheduled to perform at least 12 periods
of inactive duty that is creditable for retirement purposes are also
covered 24 hours a day, 7 days a week for 365 days of the year and for
120 days following separation or release from duty.
Part-Time SGLI Coverage: Part-time coverage is provided for
Reservists or National Guard members who do not qualify for the
full-time coverage described above. Part-time coverage generally
applies to Reservists/National Guard members who drill only a few
days in a year. These individuals are covered only while on active duty
or active duty for training, or while traveling to and from such duty.
Members covered part time do not receive 120 days of free coverage
after separation unless they incur or aggravate a disability during
a period of duty. For additional information about SGLI coverage,
please visit: https://www.benefits.va.gov/insurance/sgli.asp
SGLI Traumatic Injury Protection (TSGLI): Members of the armed
services serve our nation heroically during times of great need, but what
happens when they experience great needs of their own because they
have sustained a traumatic injury? TSGLI provides payment to traumatically injured service members who have suffered certain physical losses.
The TSGLI benefit ranges between $25,000 and $100,000 depending on
the loss suffered. TSGLI helps service members by providing financial
resources that allow their families to be with them during their recovery
or by helping them with other expenses incurred during their recovery
period.
TSGLI is part of SGLI. An additional $1 is added to the service member’s
SGLI premium to cover TSGLI. After Dec. 1, 2005, all service members who
are covered by SGLI are automatically also covered by TSGLI. TSGLI cannot
be declined unless the service member also declines basic SGLI. TSGLI
claims are adjudicated by the service members military branches of service. In addition, there is retroactive TSGLI coverage for service members
who sustained a qualifying loss between Oct. 7, 2001 and Nov. 30, 2005
regardless of where it occurred; TSGLI coverage is also payable to these
service members regardless of whether they had SGLI coverage in force
36

at the time of their injury.
For additional information about TSGLI eligibility and branch of service
contact information, please visit: http://benefits.va.gov/insurance/tsgli.
asp , or call:
1-800-237-1336 (Army);
1-866-827-5672, option2 (Navy);
1-877-216-0825 or 1-703-432-9277 (Marine Corps);
1-800-433-0048 (Active Duty Air Force);
1-800-525-0102 (Air Force Reserves);
1-240-612-9151 (Air National Guard);
1-202-795-6647 (Coast Guard);
1-301-427-3280 (Public Health Service);
1-301-713-3444 (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
Family Service Members’ Group Life Insurance Coverage (FSGLI):
FSGLI coverage consists of spousal coverage and dependent child coverage. FSGLI provides term life insurance coverage for the spouse and
dependent children of service members insured under SGLI. The service
member must pay a premium for spousal coverage. Dependent children
are insured at no cost to the service member. Family coverage is available
only to service members insured under the SGLI program, not Veterans’
Group Life Insurance (VGLI).
Spousal Coverage*: FSGLI provides up to $100,000 of life insurance coverage for a spouse of a service member with full-time SGLI coverage, which
can not to exceed the amount of SGLI the service member has in force.
Coverage for spouses who are not in the military is automatic.
For spouses who are in the military at the same time as the SGLI insured
service member and who got married on or after Jan. 2, 2013, coverage
is not automatic. The service members in this category must apply for
spousal coverage for their military spouse, and their spouses must meet
good health requirements.
37

Premiums for spousal coverage are based on the age of the spouse and
the amount of FSGLI coverage. FSGLI is a service members’ benefit; the
member pays the premium and is the only person allowed to be the beneficiary of the coverage.
FSGLI spousal coverage ends due to any of the following events:
•

The service member elects in writing to terminate his or her own
SGLI coverage.

•

The service member elects in writing to terminate FSGLI coverage on their spouse.

•

The service member divorces his/her spouse.

•

The insured service member dies.

•

The service member separates from service.

*The insured spouse may convert his or her FSGLI coverage to a permanent policy offered by participating private insurers within 120 days of
the date of any of the termination events noted above.
SGLI Online Enrollment System (SOES): If a service member is in the
Navy, Air Force or Army spousal coverage under Service Members’ Group
Life Insurance (SGLI) coverage can now be managed using the SGLI
Online Enrollment System (SOES). SOES allows service members with
full-time SGLI coverage to make changes to their life insurance coverage
and beneficiary information online at any time without completing a
paper form or making a trip to their personnel office. To access SOES, the
service member must sign into the MilConnect portal at www.dmdc.osd.
mil/milconnect and go to the Benefits Tab, Life Insurance SOES- SGLI Online
Enrollment System.
Service members in branches other than the Navy, Air Force or Army must
complete and submit the SGLI Form SGLV 8286A, Family Coverage Election,
service members’ Group Life Insurance to change their FSGLI spousal coverage elections. The service member should contact their Personnel Office
for any changes to Basic SGLI, Family SGLI coverage, or to find out when
their service is scheduled to begin using SOES.
Dependent Child Coverage: FSGLI dependent coverage of $10,000 is
also automatically provided for dependent children of service members
38

insured under SGLI, with no premium required. FSGLI Dependent Child
coverage cannot be declined. FSGLI Dependent Child coverage ends
when one of the following events occurs:
•

The service member elects in writing to decline SGLI coverage

•

The child(ren) no longer qualifies as an insurable dependent as
defined by 38 U.S.C. 1965(10)

•

The service member dies

•

The service member is discharged from the service

Dependent child coverage cannot be converted to a commercial policy.
For additional information about FSGLI coverage, please visit: https://
www.benefits.va.gov/insurance/fsgli.asp
Veterans’ Group Life Insurance (VGLI): VGLI is lifetime renewable term
coverage available to former service members who had SGLI at the time
of separation which includes the following persons.
•

Former service members who had full-time SGLI coverage upon
separation from active duty or the Reserves

•

Former service members of the Ready Reserves/National Guard
with part-time SGLI coverage who incur a disability or aggravate
a pre-existing disability during a period of active duty or a period
of inactive duty for less than 31 days that renders them uninsurable at standard premium rates

•

Former service members of the Individual Ready Reserve and
Inactive National Guard

SGLI coverage may be converted to VGLI after separation from service.
Former service members must apply for VGLI within one-year and 120
days from separation from service to qualify.
Service members separated from service on or after Nov. 1, 2012, who
apply for VGLI within 240 days of separation, do not need to submit
evidence of good health, while service members who apply after the
240-day period after separation must submit evidence of insurability. The
initial VGLI coverage available is equal to the amount of SGLI coverage
held at the time of separation from service unless the service member
39

elects less VGLI coverage after separation.
Effective April 11, 2011, VGLI insureds who are under age 60 and have
less than $400,000 in coverage can purchase up to $25,000 of additional
coverage on each five-year anniversary of their initial coverage, up to
the maximum $400,000. The option to purchase additional VGLI starts
from the one-year anniversary of initial VGLI coverage date. The option
to increase VGLI coverage thereafter is available every five years as long
as the former service member meets the eligibility criteria. No medical
underwriting is required for the additional coverage.
For additional information about VGLI coverage, please visit: https://www.
benefits.va.gov/insurance/vgli.asp.
SGLI Disability Extension: service members who are totally disabled
at the time of separation (i.e. unable to work due to disabilities or have
certain statutory conditions), can apply for the SGLI Disability Extension, which provides free coverage for up to two years from the date of
separation. To apply, service members must complete and return SGLV
8715, the SGLI Disability Extension Application. Those covered under the
SGLI Disability Extension are automatically converted to VGLI at the end
of their extension period, subject to the payment of premiums. VGLI is
convertible at any time to a permanent plan policy with any participating
commercial insurance company.
For additional information about the SGLI coverage, please visit: https://
www.benefits.va.gov/insurance/sglidisabled.asp.
Accelerated Death Benefits: Like many private life insurance companies,
the SGLI, FSGLI and VGLI programs offer an accelerated benefits option
to terminally ill insured members. An insured service member is considered to be terminally ill if he or she has a written medical prognosis of
nine months or less to live. All terminally ill insureds are eligible to receive
advance payment of up to 50 percent of their SGLI or VGLI coverage, and
terminally ill spouses can receive up to 50 percent of their FSGLI in a lump
sum. Payment of an accelerated benefit does however reduce the amount
payable to the beneficiaries at the time of the insured’s death.
To apply, an insured member must submit SGLV 8284, service member/
Veteran Accelerated Benefit Option form, and spouses must complete SGLV
8284A, service member Family Coverage Accelerated Benefits Option form.
For additional information about the Accelerated Benefit Option, please
40

visit: https://www.benefits.va.gov/insurance/abo.asp
Service-Disabled Veterans’ Insurance (S-DVI): Veterans who separated
from service on or after April 25, 1951, under other than dishonorable
conditions who have VA rated service-connected disabilities, even disabilities that are 0-percent disabling, but are otherwise in good health,
may apply to VA for up to $10,000 in life insurance coverage under the SDVI program. Applications must be submitted to the VA Insurance Center
in Philadelphia within two years from the date of being notified of the
approval of a new service-connected disability by VA. Veterans who are
totally disabled (i.e. unable to work due to disability (ies) or have certain
statutory conditions) may apply for a waiver of their S-DVI premiums. If
approved for waiver of premiums, the Veteran can apply for additional
supplemental S-DVI coverage of up to $30,000. However, premiums cannot be waived on the additional supplemental S-DVI.
To be eligible for this type of supplemental insurance, Veterans must
meet all three requirements below:
1) be under age 65;
2) be eligible for a waiver of S-DVI premiums due to total disability; and
3) apply for additional insurance within one year from the date of notification of approval of waiver of premiums on the basic S-DVI policy.
For additional information about S-DVI and Supplemental S-DVI, please
visit: https://www.benefits.va.gov/insurance/s-dvi.asp.
Veterans’ Mortgage Life Insurance (VMLI): VMLI is mortgage protection
insurance available to service members and Veterans under the age of
70 who have severe service-connected disabilities that qualify them for a
SAH Grant from the VA Loan Guaranty Service. SAH Grants help severely
disabled Veterans build, remodel or purchase a home.
Maximum VMLI coverage is the smaller of the existing mortgage balance or $200,000 and is payable only to the mortgage company upon
the insured’s death. To qualify for VMLI coverage, the service member or
Veteran must the following elements:
1) qualify for the VA SAH grant for the home
2) have title to or ownership rights in the home, and
3) have a mortgage on the home
VMLI premiums are based on the age of the service member or Veteran,
41

the length of the mortgage, the balance of the mortgage at the time
of application and the amount of VMLI coverage requested; the service
member/Veteran will need to provide this information to VA to determine
the premium.
VMLI coverage automatically terminates when: 1) the mortgage is paid
off in full; 2) the service member or Veteran terminates ownership in the
property secured by the mortgage; 3) the service member or Veteran
requests termination of coverage; 4) the service member or Veteran fails
to provide required information (i.e. premiums or mortgage information);
5) the premium is not paid; or 6) the service member or Veteran dies
If a mortgage is disposed of through sale of the property, VMLI may be
obtained on the mortgage of another home.
For additional information about VMLI, please visit: https://www.benefits.
va.gov/insurance/vmli.asp
Other Insurance Information: The following information applies only
to policies issued to World War II, Korean-era, Vietnam-era Veterans and
persons with Service-Disabled Veterans’ Insurance policies. Policies in this
group are prefixed by the letters K, V, RS, W, J, JR, JS, or RH.
Insurance Dividends Issued Annually: World War II and Korean Era Veterans with active policies beginning with the letters V, RS, W, J, JR, JS, or K
earn tax-free dividends annually on the policy anniversary date. (Policies
prefixed by RH do not earn dividends.)
Policyholders do not need to apply for dividends, but may select among
the following dividend options:
Cash: The dividend is paid directly to the insured by direct deposit to a
bank account or by U.S. Treasury check.
Paid-Up Additional Insurance: The dividend is used to purchase additional insurance coverage for all policies except policy numbers that
begin with the letter “K”.
Credit or Deposit: The dividend is held in an account for the policyholder
with interest. Withdrawals from the account can be made at any time. The
interest rate may be adjusted. (There are, however, limitations regarding
the dividend credit option for term insurance policies.)

42

Net Premium Billing Options: These options use the dividend to pay the
annual policy premium. If the dividend exceeds the premium, the policyholder has options to choose how the remainder is used. If the dividend
is not enough to pay an annual premium, the policyholder is billed the
balance.
Other Dividend Options: Dividends can also be used to repay a policy
loan or pay premiums in advance.
Reinstating Lapsed Insurance: Lapsed term policies may be reinstated
within five years from the date of lapse. A five-year term policy that is not
lapsed at the end of the term is automatically renewed for an additional
five years. Lapsed permanent plans may be reinstated within certain time
limits and with certain health requirements. Reinstated permanent plan
policies require repayment of all back premiums, plus interest.
Converting Term Policies: Term policies are renewed automatically
every five years, with premiums increasing at each renewal. Premiums do
not increase after age 70. Term policies may be converted to permanent
plans, which have fixed premiums for life and earn cash and loan values.
Dividends on Capped Term Policies: Effective Sept. 11 2000, VA provides either a cash dividend or paid-up insurance on term policies whose
premiums have been capped. Veterans with National Service Life Insurance (NSLI) term insurance that has renewed at age 71 or older and
who stop paying premiums on their policies will be given a “termination
dividend.” This dividend can either be received as a cash payment or used
to purchase a reduced amount of paid-up insurance, which insures the
Veteran for life with no premium payments required. The amount of the
reduced paid-up insurance remains level. This does not apply to S-DVI
(RH) policies.
Borrowing on Policies: Policyholders with permanent plan policies may
borrow up to 94 percent of the cash surrender value of their insurance after the insurance is in force for one year or more. Interest is compounded
annually. The loan interest rate is variable and may be obtained by calling
toll-free at 1-800-669-8477.
Reserve and National Guard Re-Employment Rights: A person who
left a civilian job to enter active duty in the armed forces is entitled to
return to the job after discharge or release from active duty if they: gave
advance notice of military service to the employer; did not exceed five
years’ cumulative absence from the civilian job (with some exceptions);
43

submitted a timely application for re-employment; and did not receive a
dishonorable or other punitive discharge.
The law calls for a returning Veteran to be placed in the job as if he/she
had never left, including benefits based on seniority such as pensions,
pay increases and promotions. The law also prohibits discrimination in
hiring, promotion, or other advantages of employment on the basis of
military service. Veterans seeking re-employment should apply, verbally
or in writing, to the company’s hiring official and keep a record of their
application. If problems arise, contact the Department of Labor’s Veterans’
Employment and Training Service (VETS) in the state of the employer.
Federal employees not properly re-employed may appeal directly to the
Merit Systems Protection Board. Non-federal employees may file complaints in U.S. District Court. For information, visit http://www.dol.gov/
vets/programs/userra/main.htm .
Special Groups of Veterans
Veterans and Survivors Needing Fiduciary Services: The fiduciary
program provides oversight of VA’s most vulnerable beneficiaries who are
unable to manage their VA benefits because of injury, disease, the infirmities of advanced age, or being under 18 years of age. VA closely monitors
fiduciaries for compliance with program responsibilities to ensure that VA
benefits are being used for the purpose of meeting the needs, security,
and comfort of beneficiaries and their dependents. In deciding who
should act as fiduciary for a beneficiary, VA will always select the most effective and least restrictive fiduciary arrangement. For more information
about VA’s fiduciary program, please visit our website at http://benefits.
va.gov/fiduciary/index.asp .
Homeless Veterans: VA’s homeless programs constitute the largest integrated network of homeless assistance programs in the country, offering
a wide array of services to help Veterans recover from homelessness and
live as self-sufficiently and independently as possible. For more information on VA homeless programs and services, Veterans currently enrolled
in VA health care can speak with their VA mental health or health care
provider. Other Veterans and interested parties can find a complete list of
VA health care facilities at https://www.va.gov/directory/guide/division.
asp?dnum=1&isFlash=0 , or they can call VA‘s general information hotline
at 1-800--827-1000. If assistance is needed when contacting a VA facility,
ask to speak to the Health Care for Homeless Veterans Program or the
Mental Health service manager. For additional information please visit:
44

http://www.benefits.va.gov/PERSONA/veteran-homeless.asp or call VA’s
National Call Center for Homeless Veterans at 1-888 AIDVET (1-888-4243838).
Homeless Veterans Dental Program: The Homeless Veterans Dental
Program was established by the Veterans Administration in 1992. The program is funded through the Office of Dentistry and located at the James
A. Haley Veterans’ Hospital. For additional information on the Homeless
Dental Program please visit: https://www.va.gov/homeless/dental.asp.
VA Health Care for Homeless Veterans (HCHV) Program: The HCHV
Program provides a gateway to VA and community supportive services
for eligible Veterans. Through the HCHV Program, Veterans are provided
with case management and residential treatment in the community.
The program also conducts outreach to homeless Veterans who are not
likely to come to VA facilities on their own. For more information on VA
homeless programs and services, Veterans currently enrolled in VA health
care can speak with their VA mental health or health care provider. Other
Veterans and interested parties can find a complete list of VA health care
facilities at http://www.va.gov, or they can call VA’s general information
hotline at 1-800-827-1000. If assistance is needed when contacting a VA
facility, ask to speak to the Health Care for Homeless Veterans Program
or the Mental Health service manager. For additional information on VA
Homeless program website please visit: http://www.va.gov/homeless.
Homeless Veteran Community Employment Services: The HVCES
Program provides a range of site-specific employment services rather
than being a discrete program. There are no eligibility requirements for
Veterans to receive assistance from HVCES other than participation in
a VHA homeless program. HVCES staff ensure a range of employment
services are accessible to Veterans who have experienced homelessness.
Individualized employment services are provided to overcome barriers preventing the Veteran from returning to work, such as a poor work
history, lack of transportation and appropriate clothing, history of justice
involvement and co-occurring substance use and/or mental health issues.

HVCES staff, embedded in homeless programs within the medical centers,
complement existing medical center-based employment services, and
are a bridge to employment opportunities and resources in the local
community. HVCES is staffed by community employment coordinators
(CECs), located at each VA medical center, and employment specialists
45

within the Health Care for Homeless Veterans (HCHV) and Department of
Housing and Urban Development-VA Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH)
Programs, who are located at a limited number of VA medical centers. For
more information about HVCES, please visit: https://www.va.gov/HOMELESS/HVCES.asp.
Homeless Providers Grant and Per Diem Program: The GPD Program
is offered annually (as funding permits) by the Department of Veterans
Affairs Health Care for Homeless Veterans (HCHV) Programs to fund nonprofit community agencies that provide services to homeless Veterans.
The purpose of the program is to promote the development and provision of supportive housing and/or supportive services with the goal of
helping homeless Veterans achieve residential stability, increase their skill
levels and/or income, and obtain greater self-determination.
Only programs with supportive housing (up to 24 months) or service
centers (offering services such as case management, education, crisis intervention, counseling, services targeted towards specialized populations
including homeless women Veterans, etc.) are eligible for these funds.
For more information, visit: http://www.va.gov/homeless/gpd.asp .
Housing and Urban Development-Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) Program: The HUD-VASH Program provides permanent
housing and case management for eligible homeless Veterans who need
community-based support to secure and keep keep stable housing. This
program allows eligible Veterans to live in Veteran selected housing units
with a “Housing Choice” voucher. These vouchers are portable to support
the Veteran’s choice of housing in communities served by their VA medical facility where case management services can be provided. For more
information, please visit: www.va.gov/homeless/hud-vash.asp
Supportive Services for Veterans Families (SSVF) Program: The SSVF
Program is designed to rapidly re-house homeless Veteran families and
prevent homelessness for those at imminent risk due to a housing crisis.
Funds are granted to private non-profit organizations and consumer
cooperatives that will assist very low-income Veteran families by providing a range of supportive services designed to promote housing stability.
To locate a SSVF provider in your community, please visit: http://www.
va.gov/homeless/ssvf.asp and look for the list of current year SSVF providers or call VA’s National Call Center for Homeless Veterans at 1-888-4AIDVET (1-888-424-3838).
46

VA Benefits for Veterans Living Overseas: VA monetary benefits,
including disability compensation, pension, educational benefits, and
burial allowances, are generally payable overseas. Some programs are restricted. Home loan guaranties are available only in the United States and
selected U.S. territories and possessions. The Specially Adapted Housing
benefit is available outside of the continental United States. Educational
benefits are limited to approved, degree granting programs in institutions
of higher learning. Beneficiaries living in foreign countries should contact
the nearest American embassy or consulate for help. In Canada, contact
an office of Veterans Affairs. For information, visit: http://www.benefitsvba.va.gov/persona/veteran-abroad.aspbln/21/Foreign/index.htm .
Incarcerated Veterans: VA service-connected disability compensation
benefits are affected if a Veteran is convicted of a felony and incarcerated for more than 60 days. VA non-service connected pension benefits
are affected if a Veteran is convicted of a felony or misdemeanor and
incarcerated for more than 60 days. Disability compensation paid to an
incarcerated Veteran rated 20 percent or more disabled is limited to the
10 percent rate. For a Veteran whose disability rating is 10 percent, the
payment is reduced to half of the rate payable to a Veteran evaluated
as 10 percent disabled. Payments are not reduced for participants in
work-release programs, residing in halfway houses, or under community
control. Disability, death or survivor pension paid to a Veteran or beneficiary incarcerated following conviction of a felony or misdemeanor must
be discontinued.
Benefits not paid to a Veteran or surviving spouse while incarcerated may
be apportioned to eligible dependents. Failure to notify VA of a Veteran
or beneficiary’s incarceration can result in overpayment of benefits and
the subsequent loss of all VA financial benefits until the overpayment is
recovered.
NOTE: VA benefits will not be provided to any Veteran, survivor or dependent wanted for an outstanding felony warrant.
The Health Care for Re-Entry Veterans (HCRV) Program: The HCRV
Program offers outreach, referrals, and short-term case management
assistance for incarcerated Veterans who may be at risk for homelessness upon their release. To locate an outreach worker please visit: www.
va.gov/homeless/reentry.asp.
The Veterans Justice Outreach Program (VJO): The VJO Program provides outreach and linkage to needed treatment and services to Veterans
47

involved in law enforcement encounters, seen in the court system, and/
or incarcerated in local jails who may be at risk for homelessness upon
their release. To locate a Veterans Justice Outreach Specialist, please visit:
http://www.va.gov/HOMELESS/VJO.asp .
Veterans of Operation Enduring Freedom, Iraqi Freedom, and New
Dawn (OEF/OIF/OND): VA has personnel stationed at major military
hospitals to help seriously injured service members returning from
Operations Enduring Freedom, Iraqi Freedom, and New Dawn (OEF/OIF/
OND) as they transition from military to civilian life. OEF/ OIF/OND service
members who have questions about VA benefits or need assistance filing
a VA claim or accessing services can contact the nearest VA office or call
1-800-827-1000.
VOW to Hire Heroes Act: The Act made Transition Assistance Program
(TAP), including attendance at VA benefit briefings, mandatory for most
service members transitioning to civilian status; upgraded career counseling options, focused TAP more heavily on job hunting skills, and tailored
the program for the 21st century job market. The Act allows service
members to begin the post-military employment process prior to separation or retirement from military service. This enhances opportunities to
connect transitioning service members to both private-sector employers
and Federal agencies seeking to hire Veterans. It also provides disabled
Veterans up to one year of additional vocational rehabilitation and employment benefits. The Act provides tax credits for hiring Veterans and
disabled Veterans who are out of work.
Transition Assistance Program (TAP): TAP consists of comprehensive
workshops at military installations designed to assist service members as
they transition from military to civilian life. A critical component of TAP is
Transition GPS (Goals, Plans, Success); an outcome-based, modular curriculum with standardized learning objectives that transforms the way the
military prepares service members separating from Active Duty to pursue
their post-service career goals. It is designed to help service members
depart military service “career ready” and meet mandatory Career Readiness Standards (CRS), regardless of their branch of service. VA collaborates
with the Department of Defense to align TAP offerings with the current
Military Life Cycle framework, which embeds transition planning and
preparation for meeting career-readiness standards throughout a service
member’s military career. The intent is for VA to utilize these touchpoints
with service members throughout the Military Life Cycle to provide key
information that service members need at each step to ensure they are
ready for a successful transition. Retiring service members are allowed to
48

attend Transition GPS up to 24 months prior to retirement, while separating service members can attend up to 12 months prior to separating. VA
benefit briefings are comprised of two briefings focusing on benefits and
services service members have earned through their service. Additionally, service members have the opportunity to participate in one or more
two-day tailored tracks within Transition GPS curriculum to meet their
personal career goals: Accessing Higher Education, for those pursuing a
college education; Career Technical Training, for those seeking industryrecognized credentials in shorter-term training programs; or Entrepreneurship, for those wanting to start their own business. Service members
can also sign up for one-on-one appointments with a VA representative;
interested service members should contact their local TAP manager to
sign up for this program.
In-Transition: In-Transition is a free, voluntary program with coaches who
provide psychological health care support to service members, Veterans,
and their health care providers during times of transition. This program
provides access to transitional support, motivation, and healthy lifestyle assistance and advice from qualified coaches through the toll-free
telephone number 1-800-424-7877. For more information, visit: http://
intransition.dcoe.mil
Federal Recovery Coordination Program (FRCP): The Federal Recovery
Coordination Program (FRCP) assists severely wounded, ill, or injured service members, Veterans, and their families. Federal Recovery Coordinators
(FRCs) are located at both VA and Department of Defense (DoD) facilities,
and provide virtual care coordination and advocacy services regardless of client location, medical treatment, geographic location of injury,
place of medical diagnosis, or military or Veteran status. FRCs provide
client centric services that assist with coordinating benefits, services, and
care which are aligned with client goals for recovery, rehabilitation, and
reintegration. The program is open to clients who may have one or more
of the following problems: Traumatic Brain Injury; Post- Traumatic Stress
Disorder; Spinal Cord Injury; Burns; Amputation; Blindness of Visual Impairments; an at risk for psychological complications If you think you may
qualify, know someone who may qualify or desire additional information,
please contact the FRCP at 877-732-4456.
Pre-Separation Counseling through Military Service: service members
may receive pre-separation counseling 24 months prior to retirement or
12 months prior to separation from active duty. These sessions present information on education, training, employment assistance, National Guard
49

and Reserve programs, medical benefits, and financial assistance.
Verification of Military Experience and Training (VMET): The VMET
Document, DD Form 2586, helps service members verify previous experience and training to potential employers, negotiate credits at schools,
and obtain certificates or licenses. VMET documents are available only
through each military branch’s support office and are intended for service
members who have at least six months of active duty. Service members
should obtain VMET documents from their Transition Support Office
within 12 months of separation or 24 months of retirement.
Veterans’ Workforce Investment Program: Recently separated Veterans and those with service-connected disabilities, significant barriers
to employment, or who served on active duty during a period in which
a campaign or expedition badge was authorized, can contact the nearest state employment office for employment help through the Veterans
Workforce Investment Program. The program may be conducted through
state or local public agencies, community organizations or private, nonprofit organizations.
State Employment Services: Veterans can find employment information, education and training opportunities, job counseling, job search
workshops, and resume preparation assistance by visiting their individual
State Department of Veteran Affairs. Many states have Veterans Employment Centers, at state Workforce Career or One-Stop Centers that. These
offices also have specialists to help disabled Veterans find employment.
Additional information and access to services are available at https://
www.vets.gov/employment/ .
Unemployment Compensation: Veterans who do not begin civilian
employment immediately after leaving military service may receive
weekly unemployment compensation for a limited time. The amount and
duration of payments are determined by individual states. Apply by contacting the nearest state employment office listed in the local telephone
directory.
Veterans Preference for Federal Jobs: Since the time of the Civil War,
Veterans of the armed Forces have been given some degree of preference
in appointments to federal jobs. Veterans’ preference in its present form
comes from the Veterans’ Preference Act of 1944, as amended, and now
codified in Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.). By law, Veterans who are
disabled or who served on active duty during certain specified time periods or in military campaigns are entitled to preference over others when
50

hiring from competitive lists of eligible candidates, and also in retention
during a reduction in force.
To receive preference, a Veteran must have been discharged or released
from active duty under honorable conditions or received a general
discharge. Preference is also provided for certain widows and widowers
of deceased Veterans who died in service, spouses of service-connected
disabled Veterans, and mothers of Veterans who died under honorable
conditions on active duty or have permanent and total service-connected
disabilities.
Enrolled Veterans can print a copy of their preference letter from the
eBenefits portal. For more information about Veterans Preference, please
visit: www.usajobs.gov, www.fedshirevets.gov.
Veterans’ Recruitment Appointment: Veterans’ recruitment appointment allows federal agencies to appoint eligible Veterans to jobs without
competition. These appointments can be converted to career or careerconditional positions after two years of satisfactory work. Veterans should
apply directly to the agency where they wish to work. For additional
information on Veterans Recruitment Appointment, please visit: http://
www.fedshirevets.gov/.
Small Businesses: VA’s Center for Verification and Evaluation (CVE) helps
Veterans interested in forming or expanding small businesses, and helps
VA contracting offices identify Veteran-owned small businesses. For additional information call toll-free at: 1-866-584-2344 or visit: https://www.
va.gov/osdbu/
Like other federal agencies, VA is required to place a portion of its contracts and purchases with small and disadvantaged businesses. VA has a
special office to help small and disadvantaged businesses get information
on VA acquisition opportunities. For additional information call toll-free
at: 1-800-949-8387 or visit: http://www.va.gov/osdbu/ or write to the:
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Office of Small Business (OOSB)
810 Vermont Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20420-0001
Dependents & Survivors Health Care - Civilian Health and Medical
Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs (CHAMPVA): Under
CHAMPVA, certain dependents and survivors can receive reimbursement for most medical expenses – inpatient, outpatient, mental health,
51

prescription medication, skilled nursing care and durable medical equipment.
To be eligible for CHAMPVA, an individual cannot be eligible for TRICARE
(the medical program for civilian dependents provided by DoD) and
must be one of the following: the spouse or child of a Veteran whom VA
has rated permanently and totally disabled due to a service-connected
disability or the surviving spouse or child of a Veteran, who died from a
VA-rated service-connected disability, or who, at the time of death, was
rated permanently and totally disabled or the surviving spouse or child of
a Veteran who died on active duty service and in the line of duty, not due
to misconduct.
However, in most cases, these family members are eligible for TRICARE,
not CHAMPVA. A surviving spouse under age 55 who remarries loses
CHAMPVA eligibility at midnight of the date on remarriage. He/she may
re-establish eligibility if the remarriage ends by death, divorce or annulment effective the first day of the month following the termination of the
remarriage or December 1, 1999, whichever is later. A surviving spouse
who remarries after age 55 does not lose eligibility upon remarriage.
For those who have Medicare entitlement or other health insurance,
CHAMPVA is a secondary payer. Beneficiaries with Medicare must be
enrolled in Parts A&B to maintain CHAMPVA eligibility. For additional
information please call 1-800-733-8387 or visit: https://www.va.gov/
COMMUNITYCARE/programs/dependents/champva/champva_eligibility.
asp , or write:
Chief Business Office Purchased Care
VA Health Administration Center, CHAMPVA
P.O. Box 469028
Denver, CO 80246
Key Information for Family Members about the Affordable Care Act:
The Affordable Care Act, also known as the health care law, was created to
expand access to affordable health care coverage to all Americans, lower
costs, and improve quality and care coordination. Under the health care
law, people will have health coverage that meets a minimum standard
(called “minimum essential coverage”) by Jan. 1, 2014 or qualify for an
exemption, or pay a fee when filing their taxes, if they have affordable options but remain uninsured.
VA wants all Veterans and their families to receive health care that improves their health and well-being. Dependents and/survivors enrolled
52

in the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs (CHAMPVA) or the Spina Bifida Health Care Program meet
the requirement to have health care coverage under the health care law
and do not need to take any additional steps. The law does not change
CHAMPVA or Spina Bifida benefits, access or costs. Veterans’ family members who do not have coverage that meets the health care law’s standard
should consider their options through the Health Insurance Marketplace,
which is a new way to shop for and purchase private health insurance. For
more information about the Health Insurance Marketplace, visit http://
www.healthcare.gov or call 1-800-318-2596. For additional information
about the VA and the health care law, visit http://www.va.gov/aca or call
1-877-222-VETS (8387)
Dependents & Survivors Benefits - Death Gratuity Payment: Military services provide payment, called a death gratuity, in the amount of
$100,000 to the next of kin of service members who die while on active
duty (including those who die within 120 days of separation) as a result of
service-connected injury or illness. If there is no surviving spouse or child,
then parents or siblings designated as next of kin by the service member
may be provided the payment. The payment is made by the last military
command of the deceased. If the beneficiary is not paid automatically,
application may be made to the military service concerned.
Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC): DIC is a tax-free
monetary benefit generally payable to eligible survivors of military
service members who died in the line of duty or eligible survivors of
Veterans whose death resulted from a service-related injury or disease.
DIC may also be paid to certain survivors of Veterans who were totally
disabled from service –connected conditions at the time of death, even
though their service connected disabilities did not cause their deaths. The
survivor qualifies if the Veteran was:
1. Continuously rated totally disabled for a period of 10 years immediately
preceding death; or
2. Continuously rated totally disabled from the date of military discharge
and for at least 5 years immediately preceding death; or
3. A former POW who was continuously rated totally disabled for a period
of at least one year immediately preceding death.
4. For more detailed information, visit http://www.benefits.va.gov/COMPENSATION/types-dependency_and_indemnity.asp .
DIC Eligibility: (Surviving Spouse): To qualify for DIC, a surviving spouse
must meet the following requirements: married to a service member who
53

died on active duty, active duty for training, or inactive duty training, or
validly married the Veteran before Jan. 1, 1957, or married the Veteran
within 15 years of discharge from the period of military service in which
the disease or injury that caused the Veteran’s death began or was aggravated, or was married to the Veteran for a least one year, or had a child
with the Veteran, and cohabitated with the Veteran continuously until the
Veteran’s death, or if separated, was not at fault for the separation, and is
not currently remarried.
Note: A surviving spouse who remarried on or after Dec.16, 2003, and on
or after attaining age 57, is entitled to continue to receive DIC.
DIC Eligibility (Surviving Child): Not included on the surviving spouse’s
DIC, AND Unmarried, AND Under age 18, or between the ages of 18 and
23 and attending school at an approved institution.
Note: A child adopted out of the Veteran’s family may be eligible for DIC if
all other eligibility criteria are met.
DIC Eligibility (Surviving Parent): VA provides an income-based
monthly benefit to the surviving parent(s) of a service member or Veteran
whose death was service-related. When countable income exceeds the
limit set by law, no benefits are payable. The spouse’s income must also
be included if the parent is living with a spouse.
DIC and Aid and Attendance/Housebound Benefits: If a Veteran died
on or after Jan. 1, 1993, his/her surviving spouse may receive additional
benefits beyond the basic DIC rate if they are residing in a skilled nursing
facility, require the regular assistance of another person to perform the
activities of daily living, or if they are permanently housebound. This additional benefit is referred to as “Aid and Attendance” or “Housebound.”
DIC 8-Year Special Allowance: DIC 8-Year Special Allowance: If a deceased Veteran was considered “permanent and totally disabled” (either
by 100 percent rating or permanent and total individual unemployability)
for eight (8) continuous years prior to death, his/her surviving spouse
may be entitled to an additional amount of $272.46 monthly on the
DIC award effective Dec. 1, 2017. If there are any surviving dependent
children under age 18 in the care of the surviving spouse, an additional
$270.00 effective Dec. 1, 2017 may be further added to the DIC award
for the initial two (2) years of entitlement. This additional amount will be
automatically terminated two years after the DIC award grant.
54

Restored Entitlement Program for Survivors: An additional special
benefit may be payable to Survivors of a Veteran who died of service-connected causes prior to Aug. 13, 1981. The amount of the benefit is based
on information provided by the Social Security Administration.
Survivors Pension: Survivors Pension is a tax-free benefit payable to
low-income surviving spouses or children who have not married/ remarried since the death of the Veteran. Survivors Pension is an income based
program, and any benefit payable is reduced by annual income from
other sources, such as Social Security. If the Survivor has unreimbursed
medical expenses, these costs can be deducted from countable income
to increase the benefit amount (such as cost of care at an Assisted Living
or Skilled Nursing Facility).
To be eligible for Survivor’s Pension, the deceased Veteran must have met
the following requirements:
1. If the Veteran served on or before Sept. 7, 1980, he/she must have
served at least 90 days of active military service, with at least one day during a war time period.
2. If the Veteran entered active duty after Sept. 7, 1980, the Veteran generally must have served at least 24 months or the full tour of duty with at
least one day during a war time period.
3. Discharged from military service under other than dishonorable conditions.
To qualify as a surviving child of a deceased Veteran, the child must meet
the following requirements: under age 18 or under age 23 if attending a
VA-approved school or permanently incapable of self-support due to a
disability diagnosed before age 18. Additional information on pension
benefits is available at http://www.benefits.va.gov/pension/ . To apply,
complete VA Form 21P-534EZ and mail it to the Pension Management
Center (PMC) of jurisdiction.
Note: Survivors pension provides a monthly payment to bring an eligible
person’s income to a level established by law. The payment is reduced by
the annual income from other sources such as Social Security.
Survivors Aid and Attendance and Housebound Benefits: Survivors
who are eligible for pension and require the aid and attendance of another person, or are housebound, may be eligible for a higher maximum
55

pension rate. These additional benefits cannot be paid without eligibility
to pension. An eligible individual may qualify if he or she requires the
regular aid of another person in order to perform personal functions required for everyday living, is bedridden, a patient in a nursing home due
to mental or physical incapacity, blind, or permanently and substantially
confined to his/her immediate premises because of a disability.
To apply for aid and attendance or housebound benefits, submit a VA
Form 21-2680, Examination for Housebound Status or Permanent Need
for Regular Aid and Attendance to the nearest Regional Office or PMC.
Please include copies of any evidence, preferably a report from an attending physician or a nursing home, validating the need for aid and attendance or housebound status. The report should contain sufficient detail
to determine whether there is disease or injury producing physical or
mental impairment, loss of coordination, or conditions affecting the ability to dress and undress, to feed oneself, to attend to sanitary needs, and
to keep oneself ordinarily clean and presentable, or whether confined to
the immediate premises due to disability.
Children of Women Vietnam Veterans Born with Certain Birth Defects: Biological children of women Veterans who served in Vietnam at
any time during the period beginning on Feb. 28, 1961, and ending on
May 7, 1975, may be eligible for certain benefits because of birth defects
associated with the mother’s service in Vietnam that resulted in a permanent physical or mental disability.
The covered birth defects do not include conditions due to family disorders, birth-related injuries, or fetal or neonatal infirmities with well-established causes. A monetary allowance is paid at one of four disability levels
based on the child’s degree of permanent disability.
Appeals of VA Claims Decisions: Veterans and other claimants for VA
benefits have the right to appeal decisions made by VA. The most common issues appealed are disability compensation, pension, education
benefits, recovery of overpayments, reimbursement for unauthorized
medical services, and denial of burial and memorial benefits. A claimant has one year from the date of the notification of a VA decision to file
an appeal. The first step in the appeal process is for a claimant to file a
written notice of disagreement with the VA department that made the
decision. Following receipt of the written notice, VA will furnish the claimant a “Statement of the Case” describing what facts, laws, and regulations
were used in deciding the case. To complete the request for appeal, the
56

claimant must file a “Substantive Appeal” within 60 days of the mailing of
the Statement of the Case, or within one year from the date VA mailed its
decision, whichever period ends later.
Board of Veterans’ Appeals: The Board of Veterans’ Appeals (“the Board”)
makes decisions on appeals on behalf of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Although it is not required, a Veterans service organization, an agent, or
an attorney may represent a claimant. Appellants may present their cases
in person to a member of the Board at a hearing in Washington, D.C., at a
VA regional office or by videoconference.
Decisions made by the Board can be found at http://www.index.va.gov/
search/va/bva.jsp . The pamphlet, “Understanding the Appeal Process,”
is available on the website or may be requested by writing: Mail Process
Section (014), Board of Veterans’ Appeals, 810 Vermont Avenue, NW,
Washington, DC 20420.
U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims: A final Board of Veterans’ Appeals decision that does not grant a claimant the benefits desired may be
appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims. The court is an
independent body, not part of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Notice of an appeal must be received by the court with a postmark that
is within 120 days after the Board of Veterans’ Appeals mailed its decision. The court reviews the record considered by the Board of Veterans’
Appeals. It does not hold trials or receive new evidence. Appellants may
represent themselves before the court or have lawyers or approved
agents as representatives. Oral argument is held only at the direction of
the court. Either party may appeal a decision of the court to the U.S. Court
of Appeals for the Federal Circuit and may seek review in the Supreme
Court of the United States. Published decisions, case status information,
rules and procedures, and other special announcements can be found at
http://www.uscourts.cavc.gov/. The court’s decisions can also be found in
West’s Veterans Appeals Reporter, and on the Westlaw and LEXIS online
services. For questions, call (202) 501-5970 or write to:
Clerk of the Court
625 Indiana Ave. NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20004
Appeals Modernization: On Aug. 23, 2017, President Trump signed into
law, the Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017
(Appeals Modernization Act), creating a new claims and appeals process
for disagreements with VA’s decisions on benefit claims. While the law
57

will not become effective until February 2019, the new process provides
streamlined choices for claimants seeking review of a VA decision. The
framework for the new process features three lanes: a Higher-Level
Review Lane, which consists of an entirely new review of the claim by a
senior adjudicator, a Supplemental Claim Lane, which provides an opportunity to submit additional evidence, and an Appeal Lane that provides
an opportunity to appeal directly to the Board.
Replacement of Military Medals and Records: Medals awarded while in
active service are issued by the individual military services if requested by
Veterans or their next of kin. Requests for replacement medals, decorations, and awards should be directed to the branch of the military in
which the Veteran served. However, for Air Force (including Army Air
Corps) and Army Veterans, the National Personnel Records Center (NPRC)
verifies awards and forwards requests and verification to appropriate
services.
Requests for replacement medals should be submitted on Standard Form
180, “Request Pertaining to Military Records,” which may be obtained at
VA offices or the Internet at www.va.gov/vaforms/. Forms, addresses, and
other information on requesting medals can be found on the Military
Personnel Records section of NPRC’s Website at http://www.archives.gov/
st-louis/military-personnel/index.html . For questions, call Military Personnel Records at (314) 801-0800, or email questions to: MPR.center@nara.
gov.
When requesting medals, type or clearly print the Veteran’s full name,
include the Veteran’s branch of service, service number or Social Security
number, and provide the Veteran’s exact or approximate dates of military
service. The request must contain the signature of the Veteran or next
of kin if the Veteran is deceased. If available, include a copy of the discharge or separation document, WDAGO Form 53-55 or DD Form 214. If
discharge or separation documents are lost, Veterans or the next of kin
of deceased Veterans may obtain duplicate copies through the eBenefits
portal (www.ebenefits.va.gov) or by completing forms found on the Internet at http://www.archives.gov/research/index.html and mailing or faxing
them to the NPRC, or alternatively, write to:
National Personnel Records Center, Military Personnel Records
1 Archives Drive
St. Louis, MO 63138-1002.
Specify that a duplicate separation document is needed. The Veteran’s full
name should be printed or typed so that it can be read clearly, but the
58

request must also contain the signature of the Veteran or the signature of
the next of kin, if the Veteran is deceased. Include the Veteran’s branch of
service, service number or Social Security number, and exact or approximate dates and years of service. Use Standard Form 180, “Request Pertaining to Military Records.” It is not necessary to request a duplicate copy of a
Veteran’s discharge or separation papers solely for the purpose of filing a
claim for VA benefits. If complete information about the Veteran’s service
is furnished on the application, VA will obtain verification of service.
Correcting Military Records: The Secretary of a military department,
acting through a Board for Correction of Military Records, has authority to
change any military record when necessary to correct an error or remove
an injustice. A correction board may consider applications for correction
of a military record, including a review of a discharge issued by courtmartial. Application is made with DD Form 149, available at VA offices,
Veterans organizations or visit http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/forms/
dd/ddforms0001-0499.htm .
Review of Discharge from Military Service: Each of the military services
maintains a discharge review board with authority to change correct or
modify discharges or dismissals not issued by a sentence of a general
court-martial. The board has no authority to address medical discharges.
If the Veteran is deceased or incompetent, the surviving spouse, next of
kin or legal representative, may apply for a review of discharge by writing
to the military department concerned, using DD Form 293, “Application for the Review of Discharge from the Armed Forces of the United
States.” This form may be obtained at a VA regional office, from Veterans
organizations or online at http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/forms/dd/
ddforms0001-0499.htm .
However, if the discharge was more than 15 years ago, a Veteran must
petition the appropriate Service’s Board for Correction of Military Records
using DD Form 149, “Application for Correction of Military Records Under
the Provisions of Title 10, U.S. Code, Section 1552.” A discharge review
is conducted by a review of an applicant’s record and, if requested, by a
hearing before the board.
Discharges awarded as a result of a continuous period of unauthorized
absence in excess of 180 days make persons ineligible for VA benefits
regardless of action taken by discharge review boards, unless VA determines there were compelling circumstances for the absence. Boards for
the Correction of Military Records also may consider such cases.
59

Veterans with disabilities incurred or aggravated during active duty may
qualify for medical or related benefits regardless of separation and characterization of service. Veterans separated administratively under other
than honorable conditions may request that their discharge be reviewed
for possible re-characterization, provided they file their appeal within 15
years of the date of separation. Questions regarding the review of a discharge should be addressed to the appropriate discharge review board at
the address listed on DD Form 293.
Physical Disability Board of Review: Veterans separated due to disability from Sept. 11, 2001, through Dec. 31, 2009, with a combined rating
of 20 percent or less, as determined by the respective branch of service
Physical Evaluation Board (PEB), and not found eligible for retirement,
may be eligible for a review by the Physical Disability Board of Review
(PDBR).
The PDBR was established to reassess the accuracy and fairness of certain
PEB decisions, and where appropriate, recommend the correction of
discrepancies and errors. A PDBR review will not lower the disability
rating previously assigned by the PEB, and any correction may be made
retroactively to the day of the original disability separation. As a result
of the request for review by the PDBR, no further relief from the Board of
Corrections of Military Records may be sought, and the recommendation
by the PDBR, once accepted by the respective branch of service, is final. A
comparison of these two boards, along with other PDBR information, can
be viewed at http://www.health.mil/pdbr.
Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP): The U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services provides funding to states
to help low-income households with their heating and home energy
costs under the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP).
LIHEAP can also assist with insulating homes to make them more energy
efficient and reduce energy costs. The LIHEAP program in your community determines if your household’s income qualifies for the program. To
find out where to apply, call 1-866-674-6327 or e-mail energy@ncat.org
7 a.m. - 5 p.m. (Mountain Time). More information can be found at https://
www.acf.hhs.gov/ocs/programs/liheap .

60

Burial and Memorial Benefits
VA operates 135 national cemeteries, of which 77 are currently open for
both new casket and cremation interments and 17 may accept new interment s of cremated remains only. Burial options are limited to those available at a specific cemetery and may include in-ground casket, or interment of cremated remains in a columbarium, in ground, or in a scattering
area. For more information, visit the National Cemetery Administration
website at http://www.cem.va.gov.
Burial in VA National Cemeteries
Burial in a national cemetery is open to all members of the armed forces,
and Veterans who have met minimum active duty service requirements,
and were discharged under conditions other than dishonorable.
Members of the reserve components of the armed forces who die while
on active duty, while on training duty or were eligible for retired pay, or
were called to active duty and served the full term of service for which
they were called, may also be eligible for burial.
Their surviving spouse, minor children, and, under certain conditions,
unmarried adult children with disabilities, may also be eligible for burial.
Eligible spouses and children may be buried even if they predecease the
Veteran.
With certain exceptions, eligibility for burial based on active duty service beginning after Sept. 7, 1980, as an enlisted person, and after Oct.

61

16, 1981, as an officer, must ave been for a minimum of 24 consecutive
months or the full period of active duty (as in the case of reservists or
National Guard members called to active duty for a limited duration).
Active duty for training, by itself, while serving in the reserves or National
Guard, is not sufficient to confer eligibility. Reservists and National Guard
members, as well as their spouses and dependent children, are eligible if
they were entitled to retired pay at the time of death, or would have been
upon reaching the requisite age.
VA may bar eligible individuals from receiving burial and memorial benefits if they are found to have committed serious federal or state crimes or
serious sex offenses. Such benefits include burial in a VA national cemetery, and receipt of a government-furnished headstone, marker, medallion, burial flag and Presidential Memorial Certificate. Veterans and other
claimants for VA burial benefits have the right to appeal decisions made
by VA regarding eligibility for burial and memorial benefits. Readers with
questions on the appeals process may contact the nearest VA national
cemetery listed at http://www.cem.va.gov/cem/cems/listcem.asp or by
calling 800-827-1000.
Surviving spouses of Veterans who died on or after Jan. 1, 2000, do not
lose eligibility for burial in a national cemetery if they remarry.
Unmarried dependent children of Veterans who are under 21 years of
age, or under 23 years of age if a full-time student at an approved educational institution, are eligible for burial. Unmarried adult children who
become physically or mentally disabled and incapable of self-support
before age 21, or age 23 if a full-time student, may also be eligible.
Certain parents of Veterans who die as a result of hostile activity or from
combat training-related injuries may be eligible for burial in a national
cemetery with their child. The biological or adopted parents of a service
member who died in combat or while performing training in preparation for a combat mission, who leaves no surviving spouse or dependent
child, may be buried with the deceased service member if there is available space. Eligibility is limited to those who died on or after Oct. 7, 2001,
and biological or adoptive parents who died on or after Oct. 13, 2010.
The next of kin or authorized representative (e.g., funeral director) ay
make interment arrangements at the time of need by contacting the
National Cemetery Scheduling Office at NCA.Scheduling@va.gov or, in
some cases, the national cemetery in which burial is desired. VA does not
normally conduct burials on weekends. Gravesites cannot be reserved;
62

however, VA will honor reservations made before 1973 by the Department of the Army.
Pre-Need Burial Eligibility Determination: VA implemented the
Pre-need Burial Eligibility Determination Program to assist individuals
interested in determining their eligibility for burial in a VA national cemetery. Through this program, Veterans and their eligible family members
can plan in advance to use VA burial benefits that Veterans have earned
through their military service. Planning in advance for a Veteran’s or
loved-one’s final resting place can eliminate unnecessary delays during a family’s time of bereavement. Veteran families will have increased
confidence that their loved ones are eligible for burial in a VA national
cemetery at their time of need. To apply, individuals must submit VA Form
40-10007, Application for Pre-Need Determination of Eligibility for Burial
in a VA National Cemetery (available at http://www.va.gov/vaforms/), to
the National Cemetery Scheduling Office by fax or mail. For more details,
visit http://www.cem.va.gov/cem/pre-need/index.asp .
Burial Headstones and Markers: VA is authorized to furnish, upon
request, an inscribed headstone or marker for the unmarked grave of an
eligible decedent at any national, state Veterans, tribal, or private cemetery. VA will deliver a headstone or marker at no cost, anywhere in the
world. For Medal of Honor (MOH) recipients, VA is authorized to provide
a supplemental headstone or marker if the recipient served in the Armed
Forces on or after April 6, 1917, and is eligible for a headstone or marker
(or would be but for the individual’s date of death), even if the grave is
already marked with a private headstone or marker. For eligible Veterans
(who are not MOH recipients) buried in a private cemetery whose deaths
occurred on or after Nov. 1, 1990, VA may furnish a government headstone or marker even if the grave is already marked with a private one.
Spouses and dependent children are eligible for a government headstone
or marker only if they are buried in a national or state Veterans cemetery.
Before requesting a headstone or marker for use in a private cemetery,
eligible applicants should check with the cemetery to ensure the government-furnished headstone or marker will be accepted.
Those who may apply for burial headstones and markers include the
decedent’s spouse or individual in a legal union with the decedent; the
decedent’s child; parent or sibling; whether biological; adopted or step
relation; and any lineal or collateral descendant of the decedent; personal
representative Veterans Service Organization, individual employed by
63

state or local government responsible for serving Veteran; individuals
with legal responsibility for the disposition of the unclaimed remains of
the decedent or other matters related to interment or memorialization, or
anyone if the decedent’s dates of service ended prior to April 6, 1917 (applies to others whose eligibility is derived). All installation fees at private
cemeteries are the responsibility of the applicant.
Memorial Markers: VA provides memorial headstones and markers for
placement in a national cemetery, a Veterans cemetery owned by a state,
or in the case of a Veteran, in a State, local or private cemetery with “IN
MEMORY OF” as the first line of inscription for those whose remains are
unavailable for burial. Remains that are unavailable for burial are those
that have not been recovered or identified, were buried at sea, donated
to science or cremated and scattered completely. Only eligible Veterans
are authorized to receive memorial headstones or markers for use in
private cemeteries; memorial headstones and markers are not authorized
for placement in tribal cemeteries (including Veterans). For memorial
headstone or marker requests, applicants must be a member of the decedent’s family (spouse, individual in a legal union with the decedent, child,
parent, or sibling, whether biological, adopted, or step relation, and any
lineal or collateral descendant of the decedent).
To submit a claim for a headstone or marker, or for a memorial marker
for placement in a private cemetery, use VA Form 40-1330, Claim for
Standard Government Headstone or Marker (available at http://www.
va.gov/vaforms/) and provide a copy of the Veteran’s military discharge
documents or proof of military service. Claims sent without supporting documents will be delayed until eligibility can be determined. Mail
the completed form and supporting documents to Memorial Products
Service, Department of Veterans Affairs, 5109 Russell Road, Quantico, VA
22134-3903. The form and supporting documents may also be faxed toll
free to 1-800-455-7143.
Inscriptions: Headstones and markers must be inscribed with the name
of the deceased, branch of service, and year of birth and death. They also
may be inscribed with other optional information, including an emblem
of belief and, space permitting, additional text including military rank;
war service such as “WORLD WAR II”; complete date of birth and death;
military awards; military organizations; civilian or Veteran affiliations; and
personalized words of endearment.
Medallion in lieu of government headstone or marker for private
cemeteries: For decedents who served in the U.S. Armed Forces on or
64

after April 6, 1917, and are eligible for VA memorialization benefits (or
would be but for date of death), VA is authorized to provide a medallion
instead of a headstone or marker if the grave is in a private cemetery and
already marked with a privately-purchased headstone or marker. The VA
medallion denotes the decedents’ status as a Veteran.
To submit a claim for a medallion to be affixed to a private headstone or
marker in a private cemetery, use VA Form 40-1330M, Claim for Government Medallion for Placement in A Private Cemetery (available at
http://www.va.gov/vaforms) and provide a copy of the Veteran’s military
discharge documents or proof of military service. Claims sent without
supporting documents will be delayed until eligibility can be determined.
Mail the completed form and supporting documents to Memorial Products Service, Department of Veterans Affairs, 5109 Russell Road, Quantico,
VA 22134-3903. The form and supporting documents may also be faxed
toll free to 1-800-455-7143. To check the status of a claim for a headstone
or marker for placement in a national, state, or tribal Veterans cemetery,
please call 202-565-4964. To check the status of one being placed in a
private cemetery, please contact the Applicant Assistance Unit at 1-800697-6947
Other Memorialization
Presidential Memorial Certificates (PMCs): PMCs are issued to honor
the memory of deceased persons whom VA finds eligible for burial in a
national cemetery. This includes persons who died on active military, naval, or air service, members of Reserve components of the Armed Forces,
including Army or Air National Guard, members of the Army, Navy, or
Air Force Reserve Officers’ Training Corps, or persons who at death were
entitled to retired pay or would have been but for age. Eligible recipients,
including the next of kin, a relative, friend, or authorized service representative may request a PMC by mailing, or faxing a completed and signed
VA Form 40-0247, Presidential Memorial Certificate Request Form, along
with a copy of the Veteran’s military discharge documents or proof of
military service. Requests sent without supporting documents will be delayed until eligibility can be determined. More information can be found
at http://www.cem.va.gov/cem/pmc.asp .
Burial Flags: VA will furnish a U.S. burial flag to recognize deceased Veterans who received an other than dishonorable discharge. This includes
certain persons who served in the organized military forces of the Commonwealth of the Philippines while in service of the U.S armed forces
65

and who died on or after April 25, 1951. Also eligible for a burial flag are
Veterans who were entitled to retired pay for service in the Reserves or
National Guard; or would have been entitled if over age 60; and members or former members of the Selected Reserve who served their initial
obligation; or were discharged for a disability incurred or aggravated in
the line of duty; or died while a member of the Selected Reserve. The next
of kin may apply for the burial flag at any VA Regional Office or U.S. Post
Office by completing VA Form 21-2008; Application for United States Flag
for Burial Purposes. In most cases, a funeral director will help the family
obtain the flag. For more information, visit, http://www.cem.va.gov/cem/
burial_benefits/ burial_flags.asp .
Reimbursement of Burial Expenses: VA will pay a burial allowance up
to $2,000 if the Veteran’s death is service-connected. In such cases, the
person who bore the Veteran’s burial expenses may claim reimbursement
from VA. In some cases, VA will pay the cost of transporting the remains
of a Veteran whose death was service-connected to the nearest national
cemetery with available gravesites. There is no time limit for filing reimbursement claims in service-connected death cases.
Burial Allowance: VA will pay a burial and funeral allowance of up to
$2,000 for Veterans who die from service-connected injuries. VA will pay
a burial and funeral allowance of up to $300 for Veterans who, at the time
of death from nonservice-connected injuries were entitled to receive
pension or compensation or would have been entitled if they were not
receiving military retirement pay. VA will pay a burial and funeral allowance of up to $762 when the Veteran’s death occurs in a VA facility, a
VA-contracted nursing home or a state Veterans nursing home. In cases
in which the Veteran’s death was not service-connected, claims must be
filed within two years after burial or cremation.
Plot Allowance: VA will pay a plot allowance of up to $762 when a Veteran is buried in a cemetery not under U.S. government jurisdiction if: The
Veteran was discharged from active duty because of disability incurred or
aggravated in the line of duty; the Veteran was receiving compensation
or pension or would have been if the Veteran was not receiving military
retireent pay; or the Veteran died in a VA facility. The plot allowance may
be paid to the state for the cost of a plot or interment in a state-owned
cemetery reserved solely for Veteran burials if the Veteran is buried without charge. Burial expenses paid by the deceased’s employer or a state
agency will not be reimbursed. For more information about burial and
memorial benefits, please call 202-632-8035 or visit www.cem.va.gov/.
66

Veterans Cemeteries Administered by Other Agencies: The Department of the Army administers Arlington National Cemetery and other
Army installation cemeteries. Eligibility is generally more restrictive
than at VA national cemeteries. For information, call 703-607-8000; write
Superintendent, Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, VA 22211; or
visit http://www.arlingtoncemetery.mil/about . The Department of the
Interior’s National Park Service maintains 14 national cemeteries located
within larger park units. To view a list that includes overviews of these
cemeteries, visit http://www.cem.va.gov/cems/doi.asp . Andersonville
National Cemetery in Andersonville, Georgia, is the only one of these
14 cemeteries that is open to new interments within the national park
boundaries. For more information, call 202-208-4747, or write Department of the Interior National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, Washington,
DC 20240.
State and Tribal Veterans Cemeteries: There are currently 109 VA grantfunded Veterans cemeteries operating in 48 states, tribal nations and
U.S. Territories that offer burial options for Veterans and their families. VA
grant-funded cemeteries have similar eligibility requirements and certain
states and tribal organizations may require state residency or tribal
membership. Some services, particularly for family members, may require
a fee. Contact the state or tribal Veterans cemetery or the state Veterans
Affairs office for information.
To locate a state or tribal Veterans cemetery, visit http://www.cem.va.gov/
cem/grants/index.asp .
Unclaimed Veterans Remains: “Unclaimed Veterans” are defined as
those who die with no next of kin to claim their remains and insufficient
funds to cover burial expenses. In addition to burial in a VA national, VAfunded state or tribal Veterans cemetery and a government headstone or
marker, there are monetary benefits associated with burial of unclaimed
Veterans remains. These monetary benefits include reimbursement for
the cost of the casket or urn used for burial, reimbursement for transportation to a national, state or tribal cemetery, and a burial allowance and
plot allowance.
More information on memorial and monetary burial benefits for unclaimed Veterans remains can be found at http://www.cem.va.gov/cem/
docs/factsheets/CasketUrn_Reimbursement.pdf . Applicants must submit
VA Form 40-10088, Request for Reimbursement of Casket/Urn. For Veterans who die while at a VA facility under authorized VA admission or at
67

a non-VA facility under authorized VA admission, and are unclaimed, the
closest VA healthcare facility is responsible for arranging proper burial for
the unclaimed Veteran.

68

69

Federal Benefits for Veterans,
Dependents and Survivors
VA Pamphlet 80-18-01
P94663

U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
Washington, DC 20420

OFFICIAL BUSINESS

70

